Document 9.2: Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Document 9.2: Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings and
Suggested Clauses for Cyber-Protocols and Procedural Orders
Dealing with the Organisation of Virtual Hearings
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part II - Models, Precedents and Examples
Document 9.2: Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings and Suggested Clauses for Cyber-Protocols and
Procedural Orders Dealing with the Organisation of Virtual Hearings 1
II-9. 2
This document sets out in Annex I, a Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings (“Checklist”), and in Annex II, Suggested
Clauses for Cyber-Protocols and Procedural Orders Dealing with the Organisation of Virtual Hearings (“Cyber-Protocol”).
The Annexes previously formed part of the ICC Guidance Note on Possible Measures Aimed at Mitigating the Effects of
the COVID-19 Pandemic, dated 9 April 2020. The guidance on virtual hearings provided in the latter are now included
in section VII(C) of the Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of
Arbitration, dated 1 January 2021.
Annex I — Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings
A. Pre-Hearing Plan, Scope and Logistics
 
(i)Identifying whether and which issues are essential to be on a hearing agenda and which can be dealt with on
“documents only”;
 
(ii)Agreeing the number and list of participants (arbitrators, parties, counsel, witnesses, experts, administrative
secretaries, interpreters, stenographers, technicians, etc.);
 
(iii)Agreeing the number of participants per virtual room and whether a 360º view for all participating rooms is
required or necessary;
 
(iv)Agreeing regarding virtual rooms that will permit the arbitrators, and each side in the case, to confer privately
amongst themselves during the hearing;
 
(v)Identifying all log-in locations and points of connection;
 
(vi)Agreeing that each individual present in each virtual room will be identified at the start of the videoconference; and
 
(vii)In light of the above, consulting and agreeing among parties and tribunal on the hearing date, duration and daily
timetable taking into account the different time zones.
B. Technical Issues, Specifications, Requirements and Support Staff
 
(i)Consultation between the tribunal and the parties regarding:
 
o the preferred platform and technology to be used (including legal access to such platform and technology);
 
o the minimum system specifications and technical requirements for smooth connectivity (audio and video),
adequate visibility and lighting in each location;

Document 9.2: Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
o whether certain equipment is required in each location (phones, back-up computers, connectivity boosters/
extenders, any other equipment or audio-visual aids as deemed necessary by the parties);
 
(ii)Preliminary check on compatibility of selected platform and technology to be used;
 
(iii)Considering the need for tutorials for participants who are not familiar with the technology, platform, applications
and/or equipment to be used in the hearing;
 
(iv)Consultation between the tribunal and the parties regarding the contingency measures to be implemented in case
of sudden technical failures, disconnection, power outages (alternative communication channels and virtual technical
support for all participants); and
 
(v)Running a minimum of two mock sessions within the month preceding the hearing to test connectivity and
streaming, with the last session being held one day before the hearing to ensure everything is in order.
C. Confidentiality, Privacy and Security
 
(i)Consultation between the tribunal and the parties on whether the virtual hearing will remain private and confidential
to participants;
 
(ii)Agreeing an access and confidentiality undertaking that binds all participants;
 
(iii)Consultation between the tribunal and the parties on:
 
o the recording of the virtual hearing (audio-visual recording, confidentiality of the recording and value of
recording compared to any produced written transcript, etc.);
 
o any overriding privacy requirements or standards that may impact access or connectivity of certain participants;
and
 
o the minimum requirements of encryption to safeguard the integrity and security of the virtual hearing against
any hacking, illicit access, etc.
D. Online Etiquette and Due Process Considerations
 
(i)Consultation between the tribunal and the parties on the practices needed to safeguard the rights and obligations of
participants in a virtual environment. This includes: identifying lead speakers, non-interruption, observing reasonable
and responsible use of the platform and bandwidth, avoiding use of equipment that interferes with connectivity or
allows illicit recording, agreeing a procedure for objections, etc.;
 
(ii)Obtaining written statements from the parties/counsel that the tested platform and technology are adequate as tested
by the parties;
 
(iii)Confirming the parties’ agreement on proceeding with a virtual hearing or identifying the legal basis for proceeding
with a virtual hearing absent such agreement by the parties; and
 
(iv)Advising the parties on their duty to cooperate on technical matters prior to and during the virtual hearing.
E. Presentation of Evidence and Examination of Witnesses and Experts
 
(i)Consultation between the tribunal and the parties on the organisation and presentation of oral pleadings;

Document 9.2: Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
(ii)Identifying whether counsel will be using multi-screens for online pleadings, presentation of evidence and agreeing
the modalities for submitting and showing demonstrative exhibits in a virtual environment;
 
(iii)Consultation between the tribunal and the parties on the examination of witnesses and experts (order of calling
and examining witnesses/experts, connection time and duration of availability, virtual sequestration, the permission/
prohibition of synchronous or asynchronous communications between witnesses and parties/counsel in chat rooms
or through concealed channels of communications, interaction between the examiner and the witness/expert in an
online environment, etc.); and
 
(iv)Consultation between the tribunal and the parties on virtual transcription and the use of stenographers and
interpreters that are capable and able to deliver the necessary level of service in a virtual environment.
Annex II — Suggested Clauses for Cyber-Protocols and Procedural Orders Dealing with the Organisation of
Virtual Hearings
I. Participants
“The tribunal confirms and directs that the hearing scheduled for (insert date and time) shall be conducted by
videoconference.
Based on the information currently provided by the parties, the following participants (“Participants”) shall take part in
the hearing from the locations specified herein below:
 
a. Claimant
(List names and log-in location(s) and point of connection)
 
b. Claimant’s Counsel
(List names and log-in location(s) and point of connection)
 
c. Respondent
(List names and log-in location(s) and point of connection)
 
d. Respondent’s Counsel
(List names and log-in location(s) and point of connection)
 
e. Tribunal
(List names of members of the tribunal and their location(s) and point of connection)
 
f. Witnesses / Experts / Transcription Provider / Support Staff & Technicians / Other participants (as
applicable)
(List names and log-in location(s) and point of connection)
Each Participant will promptly notify, by email communication circulated to all Participants, any change to their log-in
location or connection details.”
II. Technical Issues, Specifications, Requirements and Support Staff
“The parties shall each secure a reliable video link connection of sufficient quality that will enable all Participants to
participate effectively in the hearing through the chosen platform. The parties shall discuss amongst themselves and shall
furnish the tribunal with a joint list of agreed providers of reliable video conferencing services within .......... days from
the date hereof, and the tribunal shall consult the parties on their preferred choice from the list of agreed providers prior
to selecting a provider.

Document 9.2: Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
The parties shall consult and seek to agree on the following within .......... days from the date hereof:
 
(i)the minimum system specifications and technical requirements for continuous and adequate audio-visual
connectivity (types of operating systems to be used, processors’ speeds, RAM capacity, transmission speeds, network
bandwidth, etc.);
 
(ii)any hardware, equipment (display screens, high-resolution webcams, noise cancelling microphones or headphones,
phones, back-up computers, connectivity boosters/extenders, any other equipment or audio-visual aids as deemed
necessary by the parties) and software applications required for the hearing; and
 
(iii)any location-specific requirements with respect to any location from which a connection is initiated.
If no agreement is reached regarding the points listed above, the parties shall communicate to the tribunal their separate
proposals together with an explanation of technical reasons for the specifications and requirements they contend are
reasonably required for the selected videoconference provider/platform within .......... days from the expiry of the date set
in the prior paragraph. The parties’ separate proposals shall be submitted to the tribunal in the format attached to this PO
No. .......... as Annex (1).
The tribunal shall consider the parties’ joint proposal or separate proposals and confirm or determine the reasonable
requirements and technical specifications to be adopted for the hearing. In determining the said reasonable requirements
and specifications the tribunal may be assisted by two party nominated IT experts or a tribunal appointed expert (at the
parties’ cost), acting independently and objectively assist the tribunal to facilitate the determination of the reasonable
requirements and specifications. If needed, the tribunal shall, following consultation with the parties, issue any necessary
protocol to set out the work and assistance to be provided by the IT experts.
When agreeing all or part of the specifications and requirements listed above, or when the parties communicate to
the tribunal their separate proposals, the parties shall consider the compatibility of their reasonable requirements and
specifications with (i) any requirements of the selected provider/platform and (ii) any location-specific requirements for
all other participants.
Any tutorials needed for effective and efficient utilisation of the services of the selected video conference service shall be
promptly scheduled. The parties shall furnish to the tribunal, within .......... days from the date of selection of the video
conference provider/platform, a proposed schedule for such tutorials. The said tutorials will provide an overview of the
features and tools available to Participants.
The parties shall consult and agree (or make separate proposals) on detailed contingency measures to be followed in case
of technical failures, disconnection, power outages, or other interruptions to the hearing within .......... days from the date
hereof.
Representatives of the parties, each of the members of the tribunal and any other Participants in the hearing shall participate
in a minimum of two test runs to (i) establish that the equipment and technical requirements adopted for the hearing are
functional and adequate, and (ii) simulate the connections for hearing conditions within the month preceding same. The
parties shall coordinate and agree with the tribunal the dates, times and duration of such test runs.
For the avoidance of doubt, it is understood and agreed that the parties, in fulfilling their obligations herein, shall use
competent support staff possessing the requisite expertise.
The above requirements shall apply regardless of the type of videoconferencing used, including point-to-point
videoconferencing, multi-point video conferencing, web-based videoconferencing, videoconferencing over ISDN, etc.).”
III. Confidentiality, Privacy and Security
“As a matter of principle, attendance at the hearing will be restricted to the Participants identified in this PO No. .......... or in
accordance with its terms. For the avoidance of doubt, any technical consultants/support staff working with the Participants
to facilitate the conduct of the hearing shall also be considered to be attending the hearing and shall be identified as
Participants. In the event that a party wishes any other person to attend any portion of the hearing, it shall raise a request

Document 9.2: Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
well in advance with the reasons such attendance is necessary or desirable. The parties shall attempt to reach agreement
on such requests, failing which the tribunal shall decide whether to authorise the request.
No recording of any part of the hearing (including the audio track) may be made unless authorised in advance by the
tribunal. An audio recording of the hearing shall be made by the stenographers retained for the purposes of preparing a
common transcript. Any other proposed recording shall be requested at least 48 hours in advance of the relevant portion
of the hearing.
In any event, the official record of the hearing shall be the written transcript as corrected or commented upon by the parties.
The parties are responsible for jointly considering and raising well in advance of the hearing (no less than two weeks) any
laws applicable at the location of any Participant that may present an obstacle or issue of legal compliance with privacy,
confidentiality, data protection and security requirements. After consulting the parties, the tribunal shall decide on what
measures, if any, to take to address any applicable privacy and security requirements or standards that may impact the
access or connectivity of any of the Participants.
In the event that any party considers that further security measures are required to safeguard the integrity of the hearing
or reduce the risk of cyber attacks, infiltration or unauthorised access to the hearing, that party must raise such concerns
immediately upon learning of the reason for such concerns. After consulting the parties, the tribunal shall decide what
further measures, if any, shall be taken in this regard.”
IV. Online Etiquette and Due Process Considerations
“To achieve the necessary level of cooperation and coordination for a successful hearing by videoconference, each
Participant undertakes to observe the following:
 
(i)identify its lead speaker(s);
 
(ii)refrain from interrupting any speaker;
 
(iii)reasonable and responsible use of the video conference facilities;
 
(iv)avoid using equipment that interferes with connectivity;
 
(v)refrain from any unauthorised recording;
 
(vi)avoid wasting time during the hearing;
 
(vii)mute microphones when not speaking;
 
(viii)require the Participants which it brings to the hearing to observe the same obligations; and
 
(ix)take whatever measures or practices are necessary to support the procedural efficiency of the hearing.
The tribunal - in consultation with the parties - shall set the mechanism for objections on the first hearing day during the
introductory discussion of housekeeping matters.
The parties shall each, within .......... days from the date hereof, confirm in writing that (i) they have conducted the test
runs envisaged above and (ii) the service provider, equipment, technical specifications and requirements are adequate for
their participation in the hearing.”
V. Presentation of Evidence and Examination of Witnesses and Experts
“The tribunal understands that the parties’ oral pleadings will include the use of demonstrative exhibits and presentation of
certain evidence on record. Accordingly, the parties should ensure that the demonstrative exhibits will be clear and visible
on a screen to all tribunal members, the other party [parties] and any Participants authorised to attend that portion of the
hearing. If multi-screens are required for the presentation of demonstrative exhibits and evidence, the parties should ensure
that such multi-screens are included in the list of required equipment.

Document 9.2: Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
The parties shall coordinate amongst themselves, with a view to agreeing the following within .......... days from the date
hereof:
 
(i)order of calling and examining witnesses/experts;
 
(ii)connection time and duration of availability for each witness/expert;
 
(iii)modalities for virtual sequestration of witnesses/experts (if any);
 
(iv)permissibility/prohibition of synchronous or asynchronous communications between witnesses/experts and
parties/counsel in chat rooms or through concealed channels of communications;
 
(v)whether the witness/expert will be sitting in his/her location together with anyone else and whether he/she will be
assisted by anyone whilst giving his/her testimony; and
 
(vi)whether a witness/expert will require the assistance of an interpreter and the arrangements needed to ensure that the
interpreter is able to provide his/her services virtually, and whether interpretation will be simultaneous or consecutive,
and whether certain additional equipment is needed to ensure that the examination process is efficiently well managed.
In case no agreement is reached regarding any or all of the items listed above, the parties shall communicate to the tribunal
their separate proposals within .......... days from the expiry of the date set above.
The tribunal shall consider the parties’ joint proposal or separate proposals with a view to making its determination.
The parties agree that the hearing shall be transcribed and the parties undertake to jointly propose a virtual transcription
provider/stenographer who is capable and able to promptly deliver its service via video conference. If the use of
transcription requires further additional equipment, then parties shall agree with the tribunal on the additional equipment
which shall be included in the list of required equipment established per the above.
The tribunal may agree with the parties or require them to make their witnesses/experts available for a hot-tubbing session.
If so agreed or required, the parties should ensure that their witnesses/experts are readily available at the time and for the
duration of the hot-tubbing and the process shall proceed as instructed by the tribunal.”
Annex to Procedural Order
Technical/Technological Requirements
[to be discussed/agreed with the parties – case specific]
PARTY XXX
PARTY YYY
PROVIDER/PLATFORM
REQUIREMENTS
TRIBUNAL’S
DETERMINATION
System Specifications
Connection Requirements
Hardware & Equipment
Software Applications
Other Requirements

Document 9.2: Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
Footnotes
1
© International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). Reproduced with kind permission of ICC. The text reproduced here is
valid at the time of reproduction in July 2021. As amendments may be made to the text, please refer to the website
https://iccwbo.org/dispute-resolution-services for the latest version and for more information on ICC dispute resolution
services. Also available in the ICC Digital Library at http://library.iccwbo.org.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
