Section E. - Conclusion, UKBC-REDFERN 530638646 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section E. - Conclusion
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 7 - Role of National Courts During the Proceedings
Section E. - Conclusion
7. 69
Powers which have been conferred on national courts by legislation, or which have been developed by the courts themselves
(such as the powers to attach bank accounts, to appoint liquidators, or to issue injunctions) are there to serve the interests
of justice. They are there to ensure that the ultimate purpose of legal proceedings is not frustrated by evidence or assets
disappearing, or by parties taking the law into their own hands. As international commercial transactions and foreign direct
investment increase, recourse to the courts, even where there is an arbitration agreement, may be essential if the aims of justice
are to be properly served. As one experienced Swiss arbitrator expressed it:
[T]he development of law and international arbitration has been marked by an obvious tendency to limit the
possibilities of court intervention in the course of an arbitration.
[ … ] It may be that the tide is now turning: it is increasingly realised in international arbitration circles that the
intervention of the courts is not necessarily disruptive of the arbitration. It may equally be definitely supportive
[ … ] 100
7. 70
As in all relationships, the appropriate balance must be found between the rights of the courts to supervise arbitrations and the
rights of parties to solicit the courts’ assistance in times of need. As succinctly put by Hwang, ‘courts should supervise with
a light touch but assist with a strong hand’. 101
Footnotes
100
Reymond, ‘The Channel Tunnel case and the law of international arbitration’ (1993) 109 LQR 337, at [341] (emphasis
added).
101
Hwang, ‘Commercial courts and international arbitration—competitors or partners?’ (2015) 31 Arb Intl 193, at 194.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
