Article 23(4): New claims, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406916 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 23(4): New claims
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 23(4): New claims
“After the Terms of Reference have been signed or approved by the Court, no party shall make new claims which fall
outside the limits of the Terms of Reference unless it has been authorized to do so by the arbitral tribunal, which shall
consider the nature of such new claims, the stage of the arbitration and other relevant circumstances.”
23-82
The Terms of Reference are intended to set out an agreed framework for an ICC arbitration. Although they are drafted at an
early stage in the proceedings, they should give to the parties and the Tribunal an indication of the nature and subject matter
of the dispute and the claims.
23-83
The purpose of art.23(4) is to avoid having the agreed framework of the arbitration unilaterally changed by one of the parties,
and in particular any delay or disruption in the proceedings by that party. There must be a point in time when the parties can
no longer present new claims, so that the arbitration can be brought to its end. It is not, however, intended to limit the parties’
right to make new factual allegations or legal arguments to support their claims, unless the new allegations or arguments would
somehow amount to a new claim. 320  This sometimes causes tension in the arbitration, as the late introduction of new allegations
and/or arguments may be as disruptive for the arbitral proceedings as a new claim. 321
23-84
The term “claim” is defined in art.2(iv), and its nature has been discussed under art.23(1). Article 23(4) is based on the
assumption that certain claims that are not referred to in the Terms of Reference will by their nature fall within the overall scope
of the Terms of Reference. The determination of what falls within or outside the limits of the Terms of Reference will depend
on the manner in which the claims are framed in the Terms of Reference. The difficulty arises in part due to the absence of
definition of what constitutes “new claims” in the Rules. However, the scope of the Terms of Reference can and should also
be examined with reference to the requests for relief. If the new claim leads to a modification of the relief sought, or to an
additional request for relief then there may well be an issue as to whether it is within the scope of the Terms of Reference. 322
23-85
In determining whether a claim is within the scope of the Terms of Reference, the Tribunal should verify whether it is based on
new facts and/or new legal arguments or whether it is a change in the nature of the relief sought. If a party claims declaratory
relief (e.g. that the buyer owes the sales price as of a given date that has not yet occurred) and then changes the claim to seek
performance, that is payment (in the example of payment of the purchase price, the due date having now occurred), the change
of relief sought would not qualify as a new claim outside the limits of the Terms of Reference, unless there were indeed new
facts and/or legal arguments that were not mentioned in the Terms of Reference.
23-86
The scope of the application of art.23(4) is, in practice, limited and based on the following rationale: the Terms of Reference
describe the mission of the Tribunal. If new claims are being made by a party that are not covered by the Terms of Reference,
then the mission of the Tribunal is being altered. Such alteration shall only be possible if the Tribunal has authorised it. The
Tribunal has broad discretion in whether or not to authorise the new claim.

Article 23(4): New claims, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406916 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
23-87
For example, if a new claim concerns the same contract and the factual basis for the claim is the same as that of existing claims,
then a Tribunal may well conclude that the claim is within the Terms of Reference. Similarly, a new, although alternative claim
for relief may well be treated in the same fashion. A totally new request for relief may be beyond the scope of the Terms of
Reference. Even a significant change in the amounts claimed by a party will normally not be considered as a new claim under
the ICC Rules. 323
23-88
In ICC Case No.6197, the issue was whether a claim was a new claim and whether it was outside the Terms of Reference.
The Tribunal held that:
 
“[53]… Claimant requests the payment by the defendant of the equivalent value in the currency of country
B of [an amount], as reimbursement of the sum which it had to pay to the subcontractor following the
substitution of the three-phase sedimentation tank by a two-phase system. The arbitral tribunal notes that
this constitutes a new claim in the sense of art.16 of the ICC Rules [predecessor to art.23(4)] because it is
not explicitly mentioned in the Terms of Reference. However, the arbitral tribunal believes that this claim
is within the limits of the Terms of Reference because there is a sufficient connection between the original
claims by the Claimant and the new claim submitted by it (cf. Lazareff: ’L’Acte de mission selon le règlement
d’arbitrage de la CCI de 1988, p.29).
 
[54]As a matter of fact, in the request for arbitration, the Claimant stated the poor functioning of the
installation was caused by, among other things, the substitution by the defendant of the three-phase
sedimentation tank by a two-phase system. The new claim of the Claimant does concern this substitution,
since the Claimant is requesting that the defendant pay it an amount representing the difference between
the cost of the two-phase sedimentation tank system and that of the three-phase system, plus the costs of
the operation because according to the claimant, this operation should have been done without changing the
price of the installation.
 
[55]In view of the above considerations, it must be allowed that this new request falls within the limits of
the Terms of Reference (See also ICC case no.3267 in Yearbook Commercial Arbitration XII (1987) p.87
at pp.91–92).” 324
23-89
In the above arbitration, which was decided under the 1988 ICC Rules, the Tribunal focused on the nature of the relief sought to
determine whether there was a new claim. The Tribunal then focused on the factual allegations to determine whether the claim
was within the Terms of Reference or not. 325  The nature of the sedimentation tank was a basic factual element that related to
both the prior claim and the new claim. Therefore, for the Tribunal, there was a sufficient connection between the two claims to
fall within the Terms of Reference. This reasoning is convincing because in an ICC arbitration, one of the key issues is ensuring
that the parties have the possibility of presenting their factual and expert evidence relating to the dispute. If the evidentiary
issues of the existing and the new claims are closely related, then not only is there no prejudice in accepting the new claim, but
it is more cost-effective to have it dealt with in the same proceedings.
23-90
Most Terms of Reference are specific about the contract(s) on which claims are brought. Therefore, if the Terms of Reference
are based entirely on one contract between the parties and a party wishes to add a claim based on another contract (but containing
an identical or at least compatible arbitration clause), which it can do in accordance with art.9, then it might well be outside
the scope of the Terms of Reference. In that case, an authorisation by the Tribunal pursuant to art.23(4) would be required. An
exception may arise where the subject matter of the two contracts is closely connected and the underlying facts identical, or at
least very similar, as may be the case in transactions with repeat purchase orders. In such a case under a broad view, it might
still be held that the new claims fall within the Terms of Reference. 326

Article 23(4): New claims, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406916 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
23-91
An issue that is not often addressed is the effect of broad “saving” clauses on the scope of the Terms of Reference. It is
commonplace for parties in the Request and the Answer to reserve their rights to add claims. If the Terms of Reference simply
refer to the claims of the parties in these documents and in the submissions, there may be an issue of whether the parties have
agreed that new claims may be added. 327
23-92
In deciding whether to permit the addition of new claims that fall outside the limits of the Terms of Reference, the Tribunal
“shall consider the nature of such new claims, the stage of the arbitration and other relevant circumstances”. 328  As the words
“other relevant circumstances” suggest, the Tribunal has broad discretion in deciding whether or not to authorise the new claim
to be pursued in the pending arbitration. The closer a claim is to an existing claim, the more likely the claim is to be accepted.
This will apply for all new requests for ancillary or incidental relief, such as a claim for interest, or for the costs of arbitration.
If the new claim is raised shortly after the signing of the Terms of Reference, it is much more likely to be accepted than if it is
made during or after the oral hearings. The Tribunal will also want to consider a party’s ability to have introduced these claims
at an earlier time. If new claims were withheld for purely tactical reasons, and are suddenly introduced into the proceedings,
the Tribunal may take a restrictive attitude, provided there are other factors that might militate against the belated introduction
of the new claims. Those factors would include the ability of the parties to submit evidence and arguments on the new claims.
However, these examples reflect the basic principle that the addition of new claims outside the limits of the Terms of Reference
should not be permitted if it would raise due process issues under the Rules, 329  the law of the place of arbitration or the law
of the place of probable enforcement.
23-93
ICC arbitration is intended to be cost-effective, and art.22(1) explicitly requires the Tribunal and the parties to conduct the
arbitration “in an expeditious and cost-effective manner”. 330  Therefore, to the extent possible, disputes between the parties that
are covered by the relevant arbitration agreement should be resolved in one and the same proceeding. A party may therefore
expressly agree that a new claim be added pursuant to art.23(4), or may decide not to object to the adding of the new claim, as the
party may prefer to have the new claim dealt with in the pending arbitration rather than to be involved in a subsequent arbitration.
In such a case, a Tribunal is likely to authorise the introduction of the new claim, irrespective of any other consideration.
However, if a new claim is raised and a party objects that it would not have a “reasonable opportunity to present its case” within
the meaning of art.22(4), and the Tribunal finds the objection justified, then there is a due process problem in including the new
claim in the ongoing arbitration. In that case, the new claim needs to be pursued in a new arbitration.
23-94
If a Tribunal accepts that a new claim be added under art.23(4), the party against whom such a claim is asserted must register
its objections or risk waiving the right to object under art.40. The response from some Tribunals when faced with such an
objection is to ask the party how it would propose to deal with the situation. If the party feels that it is not possible to deal
with the issue, it must confirm its position and ensure that there is a record that any steps it takes to deal with the procedural
problem are without prejudice to its basic position that the claim should not be added. Then, the issue of whether the new claim
gives rise to due process issues will be dealt with if and when necessary by the national court dealing with the annulment or
enforcement proceedings.
23-95
If the Tribunal refuses to accept a new claim, the party asserting it usually has the possibility of bringing new arbitration
proceedings under the ICC Rules. However, pursuant to art.10, the factors to consider in a consolidation include whether
arbitrators have been appointed or confirmed and whether different persons have been confirmed or appointed as arbitrators.
23-96
Another at least theoretical possibility for an unsuccessful party would be to bring proceedings in the place of arbitration based
on an infra petita argument and argue that the court should remit the matter to the Tribunal to complete the arbitration.
23-97
The impact of art.23(4) should not be overestimated. The parties should make every effort to have all relevant claims within the
Terms of Reference. In using the powers granted to it by art.23(4) to permit new claims, the Tribunal should in fact take into

Article 23(4): New claims, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406916 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
account the effect of admitting the new claims on the conduct of the proceedings. If the new claim is filed at a time that allows
the other side to respond to it without seriously delaying the timetable that was previously agreed, there would be no reason
not to admit it, even if such a claim could have been submitted before. In an ideal world, counsel of parties would have their
case fully prepared at the very moment the Terms of Reference are established. The reality is often different, for a variety of
reasons that normally have nothing to do with a party trying to gain tactical advantage by submitting its claims late. Experienced
arbitrators will take the practical difficulties into consideration as well, when deciding whether to accept or not a claim. On the
contrary, if the admission of the new claim will delay the proceedings, consideration of fairness could lead a Tribunal to refuse
to accept the claim if it is satisfied that the claim could and should reasonably have been submitted before.
23-98
Article 23(4) does not prescribe how the Tribunal should authorise the new claim or set limits as to the timing. Generally, one
would expect the issue to be dealt with by way of a procedural order where a specific application has been made by one party
and the other party has raised objections thereto. However, the Tribunal may deal with the issue by letter. It is conceivable
that the Tribunal record the new claim in the award but this could only be done if the Tribunal is satisfied that all parties are
on notice of the new claim and have had a reasonable opportunity to be heard with respect to it in accordance with art.22(4)
and applicable law.
Footnotes
320
See for example ICC Case No.7047 (1994) (“A claim is new and not within the limits of art.16 of the ICC Rules only
if it is raised issues of fact and of law which are completely new compared with the issue in dispute so far. If, however,
a claim is subsequently based on different legal reasoning, but still on the same facts, it is within the limits of art.16 [of
the 1988] ICC Rules”) and ICC Case No.6223 (1991), [1997] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.8 No.2, p.62 and p.70.
321
This point was rightly made by Schwartz in his comprehensive analysis of art.19, see “New Claims in ICC Arbitration:
Navigating Article 19 of the ICC Rules” [2006] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.17 No.2, p.55; see also Derains, “Amendments to
the claims and new claims: where to draw the line?” in Arbitral Procedure at the Dawn of the Millennium (Bruxelles:
Bruylant, 2005), p.65.
322
See Bühler & Jarvin, op. cit., para.21-84. See also Derains & Schwartz, op. cit., at p.269; Webster, “Terms of Reference
and French Annulment Proceedings”, op. cit., at p.563 and p.583. Beyeler, ‘Chapter 4, Part II: Commentary on the ICC
Rules, Article 23 [Terms of reference]’, in Manuel Arroyo (ed), Arbitration in Switzerland: The Practitioner’s Guide
(Kluwer Law International, 2013) pp.777–786; Verbist/Schäfer, et al, ICC Arbitration in Practice, 2nd edn (Kluwer Law
International, 2015) at p.132.
323
In ICC case 16711, where one of the authors’ was counsel for the claimant, the Tribunal stated in its procedural order
No.9 of 14 November 2014 at para.122: “It is generally accepted that changes in the quantification of the parties’
claims in international arbitration are common and that the mere change in the amount claimed (even in case of a very
significant increase) before the closing of the proceedings does not change the nature of the claim in the sense of rending
it a new claim according to Article 19 of the ICC Rules.” In support of that statement it relied on Lazareff, “Terms of
Reference” [2006] ICC ICArb.Bull.Vol.17 No.1, p.25.
324
ICC Case No.6197 (1995), (1998),YBCA Vol.XXIII p.13, at p.27.
325
The Tribunal’s decision was important as ICC Tribunals did not have the right to permit new claims outside the limits
of the Terms of Reference without the consent of all parties under the prior ICC 1988 Rules that were applicable to
this arbitration.
326
See ICC Case No.7184, [1997] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.8 No.2 p.64: “all seven orders appear, in fact to be commercially
linked with each other to a substantial degree. They all contain the same identical arbitration clause … Furthermore,
all seven orders have the same object … All contracts have been concluded within two meetings … This is confirmed
by the parties’ subsequent conduct of not distinguishing in their further contractual behaviour between orders invoked
by Claimant and those invoked by respondent. The orders also highly resemble one another going by their outward
appearance.”
327
When parties seek to insert such a general provision in the Terms of Reference, Tribunals will generally insist that there
be a reference to art.23(4), which in effect limits the expansive nature of the clause.
328
See, in turn, art.23(2) of the UNCITRAL Model Law which considers the delay in amending or supplementing a claim
or defence during the course of the arbitral proceedings, Part III, App.3.

Article 23(4): New claims, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406916 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
329
In Karaha Bodas Co LLC v Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gas Bumi Negara, 190F Supp. 2d936 (D. Tex.
2001) the argument was made that that enforcement of an award should be refused because: “[S]ix weeks before the
hearing, in early May 2000, KBC filed a Rebuttal with the Tribunal. Pentamina contends that it was prejudiced by
KBC’s Rebuttal because KBC allegedly included an entirely new position on the financing of the Project, made new
allegations of the conduct constituting Pertamina’s breach, relied on newly-submitted awards in the arbitration known
as Himpurna, and Patuha, identified additional witnesses, and presented new documentary evidence. Pertamina asserts
that it was required to secure new experts and fact witnesses and to impose upon its existing experts and fact witnesses
to review KBC’s Rebuttal submissions in four weeks. Pertamina further contends it had insufficient time post-Rebuttal
to prepare for the hearing.” The court rejected this argument on the basis that: “In fact, KBC’s Rebuttal did not assert any
new claims or new legal theories for recovery. KBC’s Rebuttal responded to specific defences asserted in respondents’
Reply by specifying additional facts, argument, and authority supporting its claims, including the Himpurna and Patuha
awards. The Court is aware of no rule or law that obligated KBC to specify in its Revised Statement of Claim all evidence
it intended to submit, and every argument it intended to make, ultimately to support its claims at the hearing. Pertamina
had notice of KBC’s claims, and should have anticipated that KBC would contest its defences”. The court thus drew a
distinction between “new claims or legal theories for recovery” (which arguably could raise a due process issue) and
filing a defence (which raised no due process issue).
330
See the discussion under art.22(1), para.22-6 and following.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
