Content of the Order, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407034 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Content of the Order
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Content of the Order
29-70
The Order of the Emergency Arbitrator will have to cover at least five different points. First, the Order will have to address
the requirement for the Application under art.29(1) of the Rules, which concerns the need for urgent interim or conservatory
measures that cannot await the constitution of a Tribunal pursuant to art.6(2) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. In the authors’
view, urgency is one of the conditions of admissibility, which art.29(1) qualifies by referring to measures that “cannot await the
constitution of a Tribunal”. Thus, art.29(1) sets a special degree of urgency, which the Emergency Arbitrator needs to assess.
If the Emergency Arbitrator comes to the conclusion that no such degree of urgency exists and that it is possible to “await the
constitution of a Tribunal”, he or she is likely to dismiss the Application on this basis alone.
29-71
In making such an assessment, the Emergency Arbitrator will first have to consider how long it may take the ICC to have the
Tribunal put in place. This may depend on a variety of factors, such as whether a Sole Arbitrator or a three member panel is to
be constituted, whether the president of the Tribunal is to be appointed by the ICC Court or by the co-arbitrators. In addition,
the Emergency Arbitrator will have to estimate how long it may take for the Tribunal, once constituted, to do exactly what he
or she is supposed to do, that is, to examine and decide upon a request for provisional relief. It is clear, from the purpose of this
provision that the possibility of the newly constituted Tribunal to effectively act and order provisional relief is what matters.
This point will have to be addressed by the applicant in its Application pursuant to art.1(3)(e) of the Emergency Arbitrator
Rules, and possibly in subsequent submissions to the Emergency Arbitrator. 584
29-72
Nevertheless, it should be noted that, as reflected in the Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration a number of Emergency
Arbitrators have considered this element of urgency not as an issue as to admissibility but as an issue relating to the merits
of the application. 585  For the authors, and as discussed in the Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration, 586  the issue of
urgency in art.29(1) requiring measures that “cannot await the constitution of a Tribunal” is different from the issue of whether
an interim measure is urgent in a more general sense as may be considered under art.28(1). There may be overlap. But a key
issue for art.29(1) is why a measure cannot await the constitution of the Tribunal, as the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions are
an exception to the general rule that it is the Tribunal that should deal with interim measures.
29-73
Secondly, pursuant to art.6(2) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules, the Emergency Arbitrator must also confirm that he or she
has jurisdiction to order Emergency Measures. The ICC Court’s President will have already made a preliminary determination
when confirming that the signatory requirement under art.29(5) of the Rules is fulfilled. 587  However, the Emergency Arbitrator
is not, and cannot be, bound by this determination, which is only administrative in nature. 588  He or she will have to make such
a determination after having heard the responding party as well, unlike the President of the ICC Court. The determination by
the Emergency Arbitrator will be made on a first impression or prima facie basis, bearing in mind that it is ultimately for the
Tribunal to decide upon the existence of arbitral jurisdiction over the parties. 589  The key jurisdictional issues generally relate
to art.29(5) and non-signatories in particular, as well at art.29(6) and in particular the date of the relevant arbitration agreement
and are discussed below under those provisions.
29-74
Thirdly, the Emergency Arbitrator will have to examine the merits of the request for Emergency Measures, and, in doing so, will
either uphold or dismiss the applicant’s request for urgent relief in full or in part. In principle, the substantive conditions required

Content of the Order, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407034 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
to be entitled to provisional relief from a Tribunal 590  will have to be satisfied to obtain Emergency Measures as well. Thus, an
Emergency Arbitrator will have to apply the same diligence in assessing the chances of success on the merits as would a Tribunal
seized with a request for interim relief. 591  As a result, the factors discussed in art.28 for rendering interim or conservatory
relief are equally applicable under art.29. The analysis as to the substantive conditions that will normally have to be satisfied
to obtain Emergency Measures are generally those that have to be made by arbitrators when granting provisional relief. These
conditions may include the existence of imminent serious harm that outweighs the likely harm to the other party (“balance of
interests test”), the risk of prejudgment of the case and the likelihood or reasonable chance of success on the merits. 592
29-75
It is apparent that consideration of the merits has not been uniform in the initial 80 Emergency Arbitration Proceedings. The
Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration summarized its findings in this respect as follows:
 
“30. As to the norms governing consideration of EA Applications, and in the absence of prescriptive norms applicable to
EAs, most EAs have applied substantive criteria developed in connection with the granting of interim measures by arbitral
tribunals and by reference to standards distilled from international arbitration practice rather than in accordance with any
specific domestic laws. This is not to say that the lex contractus or the lex arbitri have not sometimes been considered.
 
[…]
 
30. The urgency criterion is a high standard. The lack of sufficient urgency is a very common basis for denial of an
emergency measure. In addition to the urgency, in the sense of a relief which "cannot await the constitution of an arbitral
tribunal" (Article 29(1)), EAs have also considered other urgency factors such as, inter alia, the applicant’s contribution
to the urgency or whether the applicant has demonstrated that the relief requested avoids imminent or irreparable harm.
The application of the latter criterion as a decisive element in itself arguably increases the standard of urgency required.
The Task Force notes that while the criterion of the risk of irreparable harm has regularly been considered, it has not
been applied as a relevant factor consistently, let alone as a self-standing condition, whether as part of the urgency test or
otherwise as part of the substantive test.
 
31. In addition to the urgency requirement, EAs routinely consider a mix of substantive criteria applicable in deciding
applications for interim measures outside the EA context. These criteria include i) the likelihood of success on the merits
(fumus boni iuris), ii) the risk of irreparable harm (periculum in mora), iii) the risk of aggravation of the dispute, iv) the
absence of prejudgment on the merits, and v) proportionality/balance of equities. EAs tend to assess which elements are
relevant in light of the particular circumstances of the case, and similarly which weight is to be afforded to each of them.
 
32. EAs have also taken into account secondary considerations such as the provision of security from the requesting party
in accordance with Article 28 of the ICC Rules and whether the relief requested is appropriate. Orders granting security
remain rare in EA practice. There is no uniform approach as to the limits of what could be appropriate relief, although it
seems understood that the requested measure must be of a preliminary nature independent of the final relief sought. It is
unsettled whether or to what extent, declaratory relief is available in EA proceedings.”
29-76
Fourthly, the Order needs to contain the holding or ruling of the Emergency Arbitrator. In this context, art.6(7) of the Emergency
Arbitrator Rules expressly states that such ruling can be made with conditions, such as that the applicant furnish appropriate
security. Considering the potential damage that may be caused to one party if the provisional relief granted does not prove to
have been justified, for the applicant’s lack of a substantive right (or otherwise), it is important that the Emergency Arbitrator
can require appropriate security as a pre-condition for granting the requested relief. The Commission Report on Emergency
Arbitration notes in particular as follows with regard to the orders issued 593 :
“the 80 Applications resulted in 69 EA Orders: 19 Orders rejected the Application for Emergency Measures in
whole or in part on grounds of jurisdiction and/or admissibility. Out of the 59 Orders addressing the merits, the EA
entirely rejected the requested relief in 36 cases, and partially or fully granted the requested Emergency Measures
in 23 cases (the EA fully granted the requested emergency relief in only 8 of those cases).”
29-77

Content of the Order, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407034 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Fifthly, the Order must contain a decision on costs pursuant to art.7(3) Emergency Arbitrator Rules. In the 69 costs orders issued
with respect to the first 80 Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings, the principle of “costs follow the event” was applied subject to
some modifications on 56 occasions. 594
Footnotes
584
See Castineira, op. cit., para.54.
585
Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration, para.83 (“the Task Force has noted that there are divergent views on
whether urgency in the sense that it cannot await the constitution of the tribunal constitutes only a threshold issue of
admissibility or whether it is also a substantive requirement of the merits of the Application. A review of the first 80
ICC EA cases shows that EAs are not consistent in their approach to, and consideration of, urgency. For instance, nine
of the ICC EA proceedings were dismissed specifically on admissibility grounds; some of those cases were dismissed
on the basis of a failure to prove sufficient urgency for purposes of Article 29(1) and specifically addressed the “cannot
await the constitution of an arbitral tribunal” requirement; and some EAs noted that there was therefore no need to
consider the merits of the Application. In another five cases, the EA chose to address the Article 29(1) requirement
of urgency together with the broader standard to be applied when deciding whether relief was justified on the merits.
One EA specifically held that the “cannot await the constitution of an arbitral tribunal” requirement is not intended
for admissibility or jurisdiction purposes, but is rather to be considered as a necessary part of the standard to be used
when deciding on the merits. Such an approach, however, seems inconsistent with the language of Article 29(1). One
EA stated that for the admissibility test it is sufficient for the EA to assess whether the need to decide on the relief can
or cannot await for the constitution of the tribunal, but that it is not asked to assess whether the requested measures
themselves cannot await the constitution of the tribunal, as this would mean that this criterion applies on the merits for
granting emergency relief, which the EA considered to not be within the scope of the ICC Rules. Here too, it seems to
the Task Force that this approach is inconsistent with the language of Article 29(1).”). (footnotes deleted)
586
Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration, para.83 (“urgency”, as a test often applied to the merits of the
Application, may well be a different test and is not to be measured only by whether the measures requested “cannot
await the constitution” of the tribunal. Rather, the reference to the relief not being able to await constitution of the
tribunal provides temporal guidance on one aspect of what may constitute the necessary “urgent interim or conservatory
measures”. Despite this distinction, some EAs have taken the shortcut of equating “urgency” with not being able to
“await the constitution” of the tribunal.”).
587
See para.29-31 and following.
588
See para.29-33 regarding the administrative nature of the decisions of the ICC Court’s President.
589
Castineira, op. cit., para.94, p.88, and para.29-127 and following, discussing the right of the Tribunal to revisit the
Emergency Arbitrator’s Order.
590
See para.28-27 and following.
591
Reiner & Aschauer, op. cit., para.598 and at n.362.
592
See para.28-27 and following, regarding the substantive conditions to obtain interim relief.
593
Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration, Annex I, Part G.
594
Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration, Annex I, Part H.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
