Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638608 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section A. - Overview
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 2 - Agreement to Arbitrate
Section A. - Overview
(a) Introduction
2. 01
The agreement to arbitrate is the foundation stone of international arbitration. 1  It records the consent of the parties to submit
to arbitration—a consent that is indispensable to any process of dispute resolution outside national courts. 2  Such processes
depend for their very existence upon the agreement of the parties. As already discussed, many lawyers and commentators attach
great importance to the wishes of the parties—to l’autonomie de la volonté. Indeed, some go so far as to suggest that this
consent, together with an appropriate set of rules, is sufficient to turn international arbitration into an autonomous, delocalised
process that takes place independently of national law. For most, this goes too far. 3  It attaches too much importance to the
wishes of the parties and not sufficient to the framework of national laws and international treaties within which the international
arbitral process must take place. Nevertheless, the consent of the parties remains the essential basis of a voluntary system of
international arbitration. 4
(b) Categories of arbitration agreement
2. 02
There are two basic types of arbitration agreement, as already indicated, namely the arbitration clause and the submission
agreement. An arbitration clause looks to the future, whereas a submission agreement looks to the past. An arbitration clause,
which is now the most common, and is usually contained in the principal agreement between the parties, is an agreement to
submit to arbitration any future disputes. The second is an agreement to submit existing disputes to arbitration.
In this book, the terms ‘arbitration clause’ and ‘submission agreement’ are used according to these descriptions.
(i) Arbitration clauses
2. 03
An arbitration clause that deals with disputes that may arise in the future is usually brief, since when it is agreed the parties
do not know what kind of dispute (if any) may possibly arise and if it does, how it should best be handled. 5  Accordingly,
parties insert a short model clause, recommended by an arbitral institution. 6
2. 04
These clauses were often barely discussed and were often referred to as ‘midnight clauses’—that is, the last clauses to be
considered in contract negotiations, sometimes late at night or in the early hours of the morning. Insufficient thought was given
to how disputes were to be resolved (possibly because the parties were reluctant to contemplate divorce as they prepared to
walk up the proverbial aisle). In consequence, an inappropriate and unwieldy compromise was often adopted 7 —for example,
the wrong choice (or no choice at all) of the substantive law or of the place of arbitration. Such neglect is increasingly a thing

Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638608 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
of the past. Increasingly, parties recognise that all rights under a contract may ultimately be dependent upon an effective
dispute resolution clause.
(ii) Submission agreements
2. 05
In contrast to arbitration clauses, submission agreements tend to be longer. A submission agreement deals with a dispute that
has in fact already arisen—and so it should contain many, if not all, of the provisions required to fit precisely the circumstances
of the particular dispute. In addition to indicating the place of arbitration and the substantive law, a submission agreement
will often name the arbitrators, contain a definition, or at least an outline, of the disputes that are to be arbitrated, and even
(if thought appropriate) address procedural arrangements, such as the production of documents, the exchange of written
submissions and witness statements, and the timetable to be followed. 8
2. 06
The position of the parties and their advisers in dealing with a submission agreement is radically different from that of
agreeing an arbitration clause. First, as a dispute has actually arisen, this usually means that there will be an adversarial
element in the relationship. Secondly, the parties and their legal advisers will know what kind of dispute they are facing, and
each side will wish to structure the arbitral procedure in a manner that suits its own case, which may well lead to conflicting
positions. Thirdly, the fundamental interests of the parties may conflict, in that the claimant usually wants a speedy resolution
of the dispute, whereas the respondent may consider that it would be advantageous to create delay. 9  For these reasons,
the negotiation of a submission agreement may be a lengthy and difficult process. It is less advisable than inclusion of an
arbitration clause in the underlying agreement and, as a consequence, has become much rarer.
2. 07
Irrespective of whether the parties agree to settle their dispute pursuant to an arbitration agreement contained in an arbitration
clause or to one set out in a submission agreement, the following general observations regarding the international conventions
governing arbitration, and the international standards derived therefrom, apply.
(c) International conventions
2. 08
As noted in Chapter 1, the 1923 Geneva Protocol and the 1927 Geneva Convention dealt with the recognition and enforcement
of international arbitration agreements and the execution of arbitral awards. These were then followed by various regional
conventions, 10  until eventually the most important convention in the field of international commercial arbitration, the New
York Convention, was promulgated in 1958.
2. 09
The New York Convention continued where the Geneva treaties left off. 11  Its title as a ‘Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards’ is a partial misnomer. The Convention’s starting point is in fact the recognition and
enforcement of arbitration agreements. 12  Having first provided for recognition of the validity and enforceability of arbitration
agreements, the Convention then provides for the international enforcement of awards that arise from such agreements and
comply with the specified criteria. 13
2. 10
Closely modelled 14  on the New York Convention, the 1975 Panama Convention 15  was signed by the United States and a
significant number of Latin American states, and marked another step forward in the recognition of arbitration as an established
method of resolving disputes in a regional context. It has somewhat fallen into disuse as the signatory states have now all ratified
the New York Convention.

Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638608 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
(d) International standards
2. 11
What is important about these and other conventions on arbitration, 16  whether international or regional, is that they establish the
requirements for a valid international arbitration agreement and they indicate the parameters within which such an agreement
will operate.
2. 12
These conventions reflect the provisions to be found in developed arbitration laws and in the practice of arbitral institutions. In
turn, together with the Model Law, they have played an important part in modernising and harmonising state laws governing
arbitration. An arbitration agreement that provides for international arbitration must take account of these international
requirements. If it fails to do so, the arbitration agreement, and any award made under it, may not qualify for international
recognition and enforcement.
2. 13
In seeking to establish the ‘international requirements’, the starting point has to be the New York Convention. Under the
Convention, each contracting state undertakes to recognise and give effect to an arbitration agreement when the following
requirements are fulfilled:
 
• the agreement is in writing;
 
• it deals with existing or future disputes;
 
• these disputes arise in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not; and
 
• they concern a subject matter capable of settlement by arbitration.
2. 14
These are the four positive requirements of a valid arbitration agreement, laid down in Article II(1) of the New York
Convention. 17  A further two requirements are, in effect, added by the provisions of Article V(1)(a), 18  which stipulates that
recognition or enforcement of an award may be refused if the party requesting refusal is able to prove that the arbitration
agreement was made by a person under incapacity or that the agreement was invalid under the applicable law. Expressed
positively, 19  these represent additional requirements to the effect that:
 
• the parties to the arbitration agreement must have legal capacity under the law applicable to them;
 
• the arbitration agreement must be valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication
thereon, under the law of the country where the award was made. (In the words used earlier in the New York Convention,
in Article II(3), the agreement must not be ‘null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed’.)
Each of these requirements is now considered in turn.
Footnotes
1
See Chapter 1, paragraph 1.20.
2
As discussed later in this chapter, consent can be deemed by conduct or found in more than one document.
3
Except for arbitrations conducted under the ICSID Convention. For further discussion of delocalised arbitration, see
Chapter 3, paragraphs 3.83–3.101.
4
Compulsory arbitration does exist. Nationally, it is used as a supposedly cheap and informal method of resolving disputes
in particular areas. Internationally, the most striking example of compulsory arbitration was in the socialist countries
of Central and Eastern Europe, where it was employed as the method of settling disputes under the provisions of the
Convention on the Settlement of Arbitration of Civil Law Disputes Arising from Relations of Economic, Scientific

Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638608 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
and Technical Co-operation (Moscow Convention) of 1972. However, compulsory arbitration is outside the scope of
this book, which is concerned with the mainstream of international arbitration—that is, with arbitration as a consensual
process, taking place pursuant to the parties’ voluntary agreement to arbitrate.
5
In some Latin American states (for instance, Argentina and Uruguay) a clause to submit future disputes to arbitration
was not operative until a submission agreement (or compromiso) had also been executed. In any such jurisdictions, the
ICC Rules may be preferred. They provide for a functional equivalent of the compromiso (the terms of reference), which
are not included in other institutional rules. However, the requirement for an additional compromise is now increasingly
rare. In 2018, both Argentina and Uruguay enacted new legislation governing international commercial arbitration (Law
No. 27,449 on International Commercial Arbitration, published in Argentina’s Official Gazette on 26 July 2018; and
Law No. 19.636, published on 26 July 2018), neither of which contain a requirement for a submission agreement.
In Brazil, there is similarly no requirement for a submission agreement to be executed, but to be valid an arbitration
agreement must make provision for the procedure to be adopted in the arbitration, which it may do by reference to a
set of institutional rules.
6
By contrast, in some contexts (e.g. in an ad hoc arbitration) it is possible for parties to agree an arbitration clause
that identifies the procedure to be followed in detail, as well as the means of establishing the arbitral tribunal, filling
vacancies, and so forth.
7
For a step-by-step guide to drafting arbitration clauses, see Paulsson, Rawding, and Reed (eds) The Freshfields Guide
to Arbitration Clauses in International Contracts (3rd edn, Kluwer Law International, 2010).
8
This is not a universal rule. A submission agreement may take the form of a brief agreement to submit an existing dispute
to the procedures of an arbitral institution. On balance, it is probably better to deal with detailed procedural questions
in a separate document, perhaps with the assistance of the arbitral tribunal once the arbitration has commenced.
9
Although it should, of course, be borne in mind that the claimant may be compensated for the delay by an award of
interest and that delay is usually achieved only by the expenditure of costs, e.g. the determination of a preliminary issue.
Ultimately, the respondent may be directed to pay the costs of the arbitration, particularly if it is considered that its
conduct has contributed to the delay. See Chapter 9.
10
See, e.g., the Bustamante Code of 1928 and the European Convention of 1961.
11
The New York Convention replaces the Geneva treaties between states that have become bound by it: Art. VII(2).
12
New York Convention, Arts II(1) and II(3).
13
The Model Law follows a similar pattern.
14
It too recognises the validity of an agreement that submits existing and future disputes to arbitration: Panama Convention,
Art. 1.
15
Its formal title is ‘The Convention on the Settlement of Civil Law Disputes Resulting from Economic, Scientific and
Technological Cooperation’. The text of the Convention appears in (1978) III YBCA 15.
16
Such as the European Convention of 1961 and the ICSID Convention.
17
The first three are also contained in the Model Law, Art. 7(1) and (2), and the fourth in Arts 34(2)(b) and 36(2)(b)
(i). More recently, however, the UN Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) formulated and adopted
a recommendation regarding the interpretation of Arts II(2) and VII(1) of the New York Convention on 7 July 2006,
by which it recognised that Art. II(2), which defines the way in which the ‘writing’ requirement must be fulfilled,
must be applied ‘recognizing that the circumstances described therein are not exhaustive’. The International Council for
Commercial Arbitration (ICCA)’s Guide to the Interpretation of the 1958 New York Convention (2011) acknowledges
this recommendation, noting that ‘an inflexible application of the Convention’s writing requirement would contradict
current and widespread business usages and be contrary to the pro-enforcement thrust of the Convention’. See paragraphs
2.15–2.26.
18
They are also to be found in the Model Law, Arts 34(2)(a) and 36(1)(a)(i).
19
Although it should be noted that the burden of proof is on the party opposing recognition or enforcement, who must
prove lack of capacity or invalidity.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
