Appendix 5 - Examples of Expert Determination Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291557...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Appendix 5 - Examples of Expert Determination Clauses
A Practical Guide to Effective Dispute Resolution: Methods & Clauses 1st Ed.
Mainwork
Appendices
Appendix 5 - Examples of Expert Determination Clauses
1. World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) (Simple Clause)
A5-001
“Any dispute or difference between the parties arising under, out of or relating to [describe scope of the
matter referred to expert determination] under this contract and any subsequent amendments of this contract
shall be referred to expert determination in accordance with the WIPO Expert Determination Rules. The
determination made by the expert shall [not] be binding upon the parties. The language to be used in the
expert determination shall be [specify language].”
2. International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
© International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). Reproduced with kind permission of ICC. The text reproduced here is valid at
the time of reproduction—May 2024.
As amendments may be made to the text, please refer to the website https://iccwbo.org/dispute-resolution-services for the latest
version and more information.
Clause A: Optional administered expert proceedings
A5-002
“The parties may at any time, without prejudice to any other proceedings, agree to submit any dispute
arising out of or in connection with [clause X of the present contract] to administered expert proceedings
in accordance with the Rules for the Administration of Expert Proceedings of the International Chamber
of Commerce.”
Notes: By including this clause, the parties acknowledge that proceedings under the ICC Rules for the Administration of
Expert Proceedings are available to them at any time. This clause does not commit the parties to do anything, but the presence
of the clause is designed to remind them of the possibility of using administered expert proceedings. In addition, it can provide
a basis for one party to propose expert proceedings to the other party. In order to use Clause A, the parties will need to replace
the phrase “[clause X of the present contract]” in the suggested clause with reference to the relevant contractual provision(s),
so as to clearly identify the type of dispute(s) that may be referred to expert proceedings.

Appendix 5 - Examples of Expert Determination Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291557...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Clause B: Obligation to submit dispute to non-binding administered expert proceedings
A5-003
“In the event of any dispute arising out of or in connection with [clause X of the present contract], the
parties agree to submit the dispute to administered expert proceedings in accordance with the Rules for
the Administration of Expert Proceedings of the International Chamber of Commerce.”
Notes: Under the ICC Rules for the Administration of Expert Proceedings, the expert’s findings are not binding upon
the parties unless the parties expressly agree to be bound by them. Clause B, by referring generally to the Rules, creates
an obligation to refer a dispute to non-binding expert proceedings under the ICC Rules for the Administration of Expert
Proceedings. It is designed to ensure that when a dispute of a specified type arises, the parties will attempt to resolve the
dispute by submitting it to expert proceedings under the Rules.
Clause B may be appropriate, for example, where the parties intend to use the expert’s non-binding findings as a basis for
reaching an agreed settlement of the dispute which is the subject of the proceedings.
In order to use Clause B, the parties will need to replace the phrase “[clause X of the present contract]” in the suggested
clause with reference to the relevant contractual provision(s), so as to clearly identify the type of dispute(s) to be referred
to the expert proceedings.
Clause C: Obligation to submit dispute to contractually binding administered expert
proceedings
A5-004
“In the event of any dispute arising out of or in connection with [clause X of the present contract], the
parties agree to submit the dispute to administered expert proceedings in accordance with the Rules for
the Administration of Expert Proceedings of the International Chamber of Commerce. The parties agree
that the findings of the expert shall be contractually binding upon them.”
Notes: Clause C provides a simple form of clause for binding expert proceedings, sometimes referred to as expert
determination proceedings. Clause C creates an obligation to refer a dispute to binding expert proceedings under the ICC
Rules for the Administration of Expert Proceedings. It is designed to ensure that when a dispute of a specified type arises,
the parties will resolve the dispute by submitting it to expert proceedings under the Rules.
Clause C is appropriate where the parties want to be contractually bound by the expert’s findings.
In order to use Clause C, the parties will need to replace the phrase “[clause X of the present contract]” in the suggested
clause with reference to the relevant contractual provision(s), so as to clearly identify the type of dispute(s) to be referred
to the expert proceedings.
When Clause C is used, the parties should determine the effect under applicable law of their agreement to be contractually
bound by the expert’s findings.
A more complex tailor-made clause may be needed in certain cases (for example, where a price adjustment in an M&A
contract is referred to an expert accountancy firm for determination). Such a tailor-made clause may still provide for the
expert determination to be conducted pursuant to the ICC Rules for the Administration of Expert Proceedings.

Appendix 5 - Examples of Expert Determination Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291557...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Clause D: Obligation to submit dispute to non-binding administered expert proceedings,
followed by arbitration if required
A5-005
“In the event of any dispute arising out of or in connection with [clause X of the present contract], the
parties agree to submit the dispute, in the first instance, to administered expert proceedings in accordance
with the Rules for the Administration of Expert Proceedings of the International Chamber of Commerce.
After the International Centre for ADR’s notification of the termination of the administered expert
proceedings, the dispute, if it has not been resolved, shall be finally settled under the Rules of Arbitration
of the International Chamber of Commerce by one or more arbitrators appointed in accordance with the
said Rules of Arbitration.”
Notes: Clause D is appropriate where the parties intend to use the expert’s non-binding findings as a basis for reaching an
agreed settlement of the dispute which is the subject of the administered expert proceedings. If no settlement is reached, then
the dispute is referred to ICC arbitration.
In order to use Clause D, the parties will need to replace the phrase “[clause X of the present contract]” in the suggested
clause with reference to the relevant contractual provision(s), so as to clearly identify the type of dispute(s) to be referred to
the expert proceedings and subsequently to ICC arbitration proceedings.
If desired, Clause D can be modified to provide instead for judicial or other similar proceedings following the administered
expert proceedings.
Specific issues concerning the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions
A5-006
The parties should determine whether they wish to have recourse to the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions in the ICC
Arbitration Rules under Clause D.
If the parties wish to exclude any recourse to the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions, the following wording should be added
to Clause D:
“The Emergency Arbitrator Provisions shall not apply.”
If the parties wish to have recourse to the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions, and want that recourse expressly to be available
prior to the termination of the expert proceedings, the following wording should be added to Clause D:
“The requirement to refer a dispute to administered expert proceedings, before referring a dispute
to arbitration, shall not prevent the parties from making an application, prior to termination of the
administered expert proceedings, for Emergency Measures under the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions in
the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce.”
If the parties wish to have recourse to the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions, but only after termination of the administered
expert proceedings, the following wording should be added to Clause D:

Appendix 5 - Examples of Expert Determination Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291557...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
“The parties shall not have the right to make an application for Emergency Measures under the Emergency
Arbitrator Provisions in the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce prior to the
International Centre for ADR’s notification of the termination of the administered expert proceedings.”
3. Expert Determination Clause – Full Template
 
A5-007
1. “Definitions
‘Expert’: A person appointed in accordance with this clause to resolve a Dispute under this
Agreement.‘Dispute’: A dispute arising under or in connection with this Agreement, identified as
[suitable for expert determination/specify the type of dispute to be covered]
 
2. Notification
A party seeking to invoke the expert determination process (the ‘Initiating Party’) shall notify the other
party (the ‘Responding Party’) in writing, specifying the nature of the Dispute and the matter to be
resolved.
 
3. Agreement to Submit
Upon receipt of such notification, the parties agree to submit the Dispute to expert determination
pursuant to the terms of this clause.
 
4. Selection of Expert
 
a.The parties shall, within [ten (10)] business days of the notification of the Dispute, seek to agree
on a single independent expert (the ‘Expert’) to resolve the Dispute.
 
b.The Expert shall have expertise relevant to the subject matter of the Dispute and shall be impartial
and independent of the parties.
 
c.If the parties are unable to agree on the Expert within the specified timeframe, the Expert shall
be appointed by [name of an independent appointing authority or professional body] at the request
of either party. The parties shall then agree on the terms of appointment with the Expert.
 
5. Expert’s Role

Appendix 5 - Examples of Expert Determination Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291557...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
 
a.The Expert shall act as an expert and not as an arbitrator. The Expert shall conduct the
determination in accordance with the terms of this Agreement, with the aim of reaching a fair and
equitable decision based on the merits of the case.
 
b.The Expert shall be provided with such documents and information by the parties as the Expert
reasonably requires to make a determination.
 
6. Procedure
 
a.The expert determination shall be conducted in a manner that the Expert deems appropriate,
within the scope of this Agreement, including any meetings, hearings, or written submissions as the
Expert considers necessary. The Expert may, in their reasonable discretion, appoint professional
advisors to assist them in reaching their determination.
 
b.The parties agree to cooperate fully with the Expert, with reasonable promptness to supply
information, documentation, and access to personnel or things as required for submissions under
this clause.
 
7. Timeline and Decision
The Expert shall endeavour to render a written decision on the Dispute (the ‘Determination’) within
thirty (30) days of being appointed, or such longer period as agreed by the parties or reasonably required
by the Expert. The determination shall include reasons for the decision.
 
8. Binding Nature
The Determination of the Expert shall be final and binding on the parties, except in the case of manifest
error or fraud.
 
9. Costs
The parties agree to bear their own costs in relation to the expert determination. The Expert’s fees and
any costs properly incurred by them in arriving at their determination (including any fees and costs of
any advisers appointed by the Expert) shall be borne by the parties equally unless the Expert directs
otherwise, taking into account the conduct and circumstances of the case.
 
10. Confidentiality

Appendix 5 - Examples of Expert Determination Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291557...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
The expert determination process, including any submissions, materials, and the Determination, shall
be kept confidential by the parties and shall not be used for any purpose other than the resolution of
the Dispute under this Agreement.
 
11. Jurisdiction
Nothing in this clause shall prevent the parties from seeking interim relief from a court of appropriate
jurisdiction, nor shall the expert determination preclude the parties from initiating formal legal
proceedings if necessary to enforce the Determination.”
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
