Article 26(1): Hearings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406885 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 26(1): Hearings
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 26(1): Hearings
“A hearing shall be held if any of the parties so requests or, failing such a request, if the arbitral tribunal on its own motion
decides to hear the parties. When a hearing is to be held, the arbitral tribunal, giving reasonable notice, shall summon the
parties to appear before it on the day and at the place fixed by it. The arbitral tribunal may decide, after consulting the
parties, and on the basis of the relevant facts and circumstances of the case, that any hearing will be conducted by physical
attendance or remotely by videoconference, telephone or other appropriate means of communication.”
26-5
The first sentence of art.26(1) was introduced with the 2021 Rules, but its content is not new. In the previous versions of the
Rules it corresponded to the second paragraph of art.25, which deals with the Tribunal’s establishing the facts of the case. In the
past, it provided for the Tribunal to hear the parties after review of the parties’ written submissions and documents. This part
of the sentence has now been deleted, as it goes without saying that leaving the case management conference aside, a Tribunal
would normally hear oral submissions of the parties only once it has received their written submissions and the documentary
evidence and witness statements and/or expert opinions on which they rely. The wording of art.26(1) leaves no doubt that the
Tribunal is required to hold a hearing if any of the parties so requests. The requirement appears to apply to the issue of any
awards, which includes an interim and a partial award. In practice, a Tribunal will have to hear the parties at least once before
issuing its final award but may be required to do so also prior to rending an interim award on jurisdiction or partial award on
applicable law, for example. It may therefore be appropriate for a Tribunal to define in its first procedural order the conditions
under which an oral hearing other than the so-called evidentiary hearing (at which witnesses and/or experts are being examined)
must be held. But usually, if there is only one hearing, it will be the evidentiary hearing with or without legal argument at the
end of the hearing.
26-6
If there is more than one hearing, then one may be for evidentiary purposes and the other for legal argument. Given the overriding
concern about costs and timing, for smaller, more straightforward arbitrations it may be possible and advisable to have one set
of hearings dealing with both the presentation of the oral evidence and the legal argument. If the amount in dispute is substantial
and the legal issues are complex, the providing for a separate hearing for legal argument is often the preferred approach. As
will be further discussed below, having the hearing on legal argument held by remotely by videoconference is nowadays often
a good option.
26-7
The Tribunal may decide to hear the parties also on its own motion. In practice, it will only want to take this initiative after having
deliberated, and thus after having studied the parties’ written submissions. There may indeed situations where the Tribunal feels
that to improve clarity, the parties should be heard orally, as this is a good basis for the Tribunal then also to ask questions.
For instance, if the parties have made convoluted legal submissions and are relying on several legal theories in support of their
claims or defences, the Tribunal may want to engage in a legal debate with the parties as a way to test these legal theories and its
understanding thereof. Quite often, where the Tribunal would seek to organize a hearing at its own initiative, it would prepare
a list of specific questions for the parties to consider at such hearing.
26-8

Article 26(1): Hearings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406885 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Following the evidentiary hearing, the parties will often submit post-hearing briefs. In appropriate cases, the Tribunal may prefer
to have oral submissions rather than yet another set of lengthy written submissions. Or the Tribunal may want to have a brief oral
hearing following the parties’ post-hearing briefs, as a way of asking final questions for clarification. The more complicated the
issues at stake, the more likely it will be that the Tribunal calls for such hearing. Since the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic
in 2020, hearings by video-conference have become an established part of international arbitration. Therefore, it has become
much easier for Tribunals to call on their own motion for such hearings, as the costs and time that were involved with physical
hearings will no longer be a deterrent.
26-9
The date (or a series of alternative dates) for the oral hearings is frequently established in the provisional timetable under
art.24(2). Given the commitments of the parties, their lawyers and the arbitrators, as well as of witnesses and experts that may
have to be heard, establishing dates for the hearings is often complicated in international arbitrations. Whenever the hearing is
to last two days or more, this holds true even when the hearing is to take remotely by videoconference, as it requires several
people to be available during the entire duration of the hearing. Therefore, once the dates are set, it is often very difficult to
change them, and every possible effort should be made by all participants to save such date.
26-10
As discussed above, the Tribunal sets the date of the hearings in consultation with the parties, often at the initial procedural
hearing. The Tribunal summons the parties to appear on a specific date. This can be done by letter or a procedural order by
directing that the parties comply with the procedural timetable for example. In either case, there should be a clear record of
transmission and receipt of the summons or procedural order concerning the date. The date will usually have been known well
in advance of the hearing, in particular when it was set at the time of establishing the procedural timetable established under
art.24(2). If the parties have accepted the dates, it is for the parties and their witnesses and experts to make themselves available
for the hearing date, and to ensure that they will have no conflicting commitments. If the parties have not accepted the dates,
then it is arguably an obligation of the Tribunal to propose a reasonable number of alternative dates to ensure that the parties
can be represented by the counsel of their choice and that the parties’ witnesses and experts can attend.
26-11
Generally, if the hearing is held physically, it will be held at the place of arbitration. In practice, there are many exceptions to
this general rule. The Tribunal may hold the hearings elsewhere than at the place of arbitration in accordance with art.18(2)
provided that the Tribunal first consults with the parties, and that the parties agree. If there is more than one set of evidentiary
hearings, the Tribunal may hold the hearings at a more convenient place for the witnesses. Other reasons for changing the venue
of the hearings may relate to the need for, or at least the Tribunal’s wish to have, a site visit, 412  the convenience of the members
of the Tribunal and the parties or the availability of support for the hearings.
26-12
On a practical level, it is important to reserve adequate space for the hearings (and accommodation for the participants) well
in advance. Usually, Tribunals prefer neutral venues such as arbitration centres (such as the ICC Hearing Center in Paris) or
hotels. The parties are left to organise their facilities, such as separate break-out rooms to prepare for the hearings.
26-13
The issue of whether a party has been “duly summoned” is important in case one party fails to attend the hearing as discussed
under art.26(2). The Tribunal (and if need be the other party) should ensure that there is a clear documentary record of the notice
of the date of the hearing and that such notice was given in accordance with the Terms of Reference. In addition, if there is
a chance that a party will fail to attend, some arbitrators ensure that the notice is given to the official address of the party as
provided in the Registry of Commerce, for example. The issue of insolvent companies is discussed at para.26-21. As regards
notice, the most prudent course is to give notice to the legal representative of the company and any person appointed by the
court either to approve or direct the affairs of the insolvent company.
26-14
Article 26(1) deals with notice to the parties only. Therefore the Tribunal is to give notice to the parties’ representatives in the
arbitration, in accordance with the Terms of Reference. A Tribunal is not obliged under art.26(1) or any other article of the
Rules, to summon any of the parties’ witnesses, and will normally not do so. It is the responsibility of each party who submits
a witness statement to ensure that the witness appears at the hearing.

Article 26(1): Hearings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406885 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
26-15
The third sentence of art.26(1) was introduced with the 2021 Rules and gives the Tribunal now expressly the option between
holding a hearing by way of physical attendance or remotely by the use of telecommunications. Article 3(5) of the Expedited
Procedure Rules, that were introduced in March 2017 with art.30, already expressly allowed the hearing to take place “by
videoconference, telephone or similar means of communication”. Physical and remote hearings are now the two options that
must be chosen from for any hearing under the ICC Rules. Prior to deciding for either option, the Tribunal will have to hear the
parties and their preferences. In practice, the parties will often be able to agree and make a proposal to the Tribunal. If there is
no such agreement, the Tribunal will have to decide “on the basis of the relevant facts and circumstances of the case”. Travel
and accommodation costs for all participants, the costs of hiring hearing room facilities, timing issues, including the difficulty
of having virtual hearings when the participants’ time zones are far apart, physical security at the proposed hearing venue, due
to sanitary or other reasons, the number of witnesses and experts, the nature of their testimony are all factors that the Tribunal
may need to consider in this context. 413
26-16
However, in person contact between the parties and arbitrators is generally a very valuable tool to secure the integrity of the
arbitral process. It helps to foster the trust of the parties in the Tribunal, and facilitates the latter’s ability to exercise its authority.
But here again, in each case, a fine balance of costs and benefits will have to be made. To achieve broad adherence to the
Tribunal’s ultimate decision, it will be essential for it to clearly spell out its considerations and to discuss them with the parties
before issuing its decision.
26-17
If there is a physical hearing, the Tribunal should ensure that all parties can be physically present. It would be unorthodox, and
should be avoided, to have, for example, one party attend in person and the other party attend by video link only. Likewise,
when there is a three-member Tribunal, all three arbitrators should be physically present, or none. But in case of a physical
hearing, in principle nothing prevents the Tribunal parties from hearing some of the witnesses and/or experts remotely only. As
stated before, this are matters to be discussed and decided in each case.
Footnotes
412
The construction site may be in the country of one of the parties, so that holding the hearing in that country may be
giving an advantage to that party. The Tribunal will have to consider such a situation with due care. In some cases, it
may be preferable to separate the site visit from the evidentiary hearing, at the risk of increasing the costs and possibly
the duration of the arbitration.
413
Article 8(2) of the Prague Rules (as to the latter, see para.25-6) encourage parties and arbitral tribunals to “seek to
organise the hearing in the most cost-efficient manner possible, including by limiting the duration of the hearing and
using video, electronic or telephone communications to avoid unnecessary travel costs (…)”.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
