Section E. - Conflict Rules and the Search for the..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section E. - Conflict Rules and the Search for the Applicable Law
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 3 - Applicable Laws
Section E. - Conflict Rules and the Search for the Applicable Law
(a) Introduction
3. 225
As the foregoing discussion has endeavoured to make clear, parties to a contract are entitled to choose the law that is to govern
their contractual relationship, and parties should exercise this entitlement with proper care and consideration in any international
commercial contract into which they may enter. In the event of a dispute, such care and consideration may prove to be very
valuable in saving a potentially expensive and time-consuming dispute about what law governs the contract or its arbitration
clause.
3. 226
The choices generally open to parties have been set out throughout this chapter. If disputes arise and no choice of law has been
agreed, it is difficult to make a proper assessment of the rights and obligations of the parties, because there is no known legal
framework within which to make this assessment.
3. 227
If arbitration proceedings are commenced, one of the first tasks of the arbitral tribunal will be to do what the parties have failed
to do—that is, to establish what law is applicable to the contract. In some cases, it might be appropriate for the arbitral tribunal
to identify some non-national rule or custom to decide the issue in question, as opposed to a national law. 323  This search for the
applicable substantive law may be a time-consuming and unpredictable process. The next section indicates how arbitrators are
likely to approach the task if obliged to do so. By way of general introduction, the ILA’s Committee for International Commercial
Arbitration has recognised the need for guidance and development of best practices for parties, counsel, and arbitrators in
ascertaining the contents of the applicable law to an international commercial arbitration. The recommendations made in the
report, Ascertaining of the Content of the Applicable Law in International Commercial Arbitration, are commended to arbitral
tribunals, with a view to facilitating uniformity and consistency in identifying the potentially applicable laws or rules. 324
(b) Implied or tacit choice
3. 228
In the absence of an express choice of law, the arbitral tribunal will usually look first for the law that the parties are presumed
to have intended to choose. This is often referred to as a ‘tacit’ choice of law. It may also be known as an implied, inferred, or
implicit choice. There is a certain artificiality involved in selecting a substantive law for the parties and attributing it to their
tacit choice, where (as often happens in practice) it is apparent that the parties themselves have given little or no thought to the
question of the substantive law applicable to their contract and have not in fact made any choice.
3. 229
The Rome I Regulation recognises this artificiality when it provides that a choice of law must be ‘expressed or demonstrated
with reasonable certainty by the terms of the contract or the circumstances of the case’. 325  The report by Professors Guiliano
and Lagarde that was published alongside the Convention has a special status in its interpretation. 326  The report states that the

Section E. - Conflict Rules and the Search for the..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
parties may have made a real choice of law, although not expressly stated in their contract, but the court may not be permitted
to infer a choice of law that the parties might have made where they had no clear intention of making a choice. 327
3. 230
Depending on the application of institutional rules, arbitral tribunals may be directed to determine the applicable law by applying
‘the conflict of law rules it considers applicable’ 328  (granting a tribunal wide discretion as to how to determine the governing
law), or to apply ‘directly’ the substantive law that the tribunal deems ‘appropriate’ 329  (thereby bypassing altogether the need
to apply any conflict of laws principles).
3. 231
In such an event, the court—or the arbitral tribunal—may decide that the contract is to be governed by the law of the country
with which it is most closely connected. 330  It will be presumed that this is the country that is the place of business or residence
of the party that is to effect the performance characteristic of the contract. However, this presumption does not apply if the place
of characteristic performance cannot be determined. Indeed, it will be disregarded altogether if it appears that the contract is
more closely connected with another country. 331
3. 232
In practice, as already indicated, parties to an international commercial contract would do well to make a specific choice of law,
rather than to leave the matter to be determined by a court or arbitral tribunal.
(c) Choice of forum as choice of law
3. 233
One criterion for attributing a choice of law to the parties, in the absence of any express choice, is that of a choice of forum
by the parties. If the parties make no express choice of law, but agree that any disputes between them shall be litigated in a
particular country, it may be assumed that they intend the law of that country to apply to the substance of their disputes. This
assumption is expressed in the maxim qui elegit iudicem forum elegit ius (‘a choice of forum is a choice of law’).
3. 234
The assumption makes sense when the reference is to a court of law. For instance, if the parties fail to put a choice-of-law
clause into their contract, but provide for the resolution of any disputes by the courts of New York, it would seem to be a
reasonable assumption that they intended those courts to apply their own law—that is, the law of the State of New York. The
assumption is less compelling, however, when the dispute resolution clause provides for arbitration in a particular country,
rather than litigation in the courts of that country. As already discussed, a place of arbitration may be chosen for reasons that
are unconnected with the law of that place. It may be chosen because of its geographical convenience to the parties, or because
it is a suitably neutral venue, or because of the high reputation of the arbitration services to be found there, or for some other,
equally valid reason. In one SCC arbitration, the tribunal highlighted the fallacy of the principle that a choice of forum is a
choice of law in the context of arbitration in the following terms:
[I]t is highly debatable whether a preferred choice of the situs of the arbitration is sufficient to indicate a choice
of governing law. There has for several years been a distinct tendency in international arbitration to disregard
this element, chiefly on the ground that the choice of the place of arbitration may be influenced by a number of
practical considerations that have no bearing on the issue of applicable law. 332

Section E. - Conflict Rules and the Search for the..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
(d) Conflict rules
3. 235
In the absence of an express or implied choice by the parties, an arbitral tribunal is faced with the problem of choosing a system
of law or a set of legal rules to govern the contract. It must first decide whether it has a free choice, or whether it must follow
the conflict-of-law rules of the seat of the arbitration—that is, the conflict rules of the lex fori.
3. 236
Every developed national system of law contains its own rules for the conflict of laws (sometimes called private international
law, in the narrower sense of that phrase). These conflict rules usually serve to indicate what law is to be chosen as the law
applicable to a contract.
3. 237
To carry out this role, the relevant conflict rules generally select particular criteria that serve to link or connect the contract
in question with a given system of law. These criteria are often referred to as ‘connecting factors’. However, they differ from
country to country; accordingly, the answer to the question ‘what is the applicable law?’ will also differ from country to country.
Some of the rules that are applied to connect a particular contract with a particular national law or set of legal rules now look
decidedly out of date. For example, under the conflict rules of some states, the applicable law (in the absence of an express
or tacit choice) is likely to be the law of the place where the contract was concluded (the lex locus contractus). The place of
conclusion of a contract may, at one time, have been a factor of some significance, since it would usually be the place of business
or residence of one of the parties and might well also have been the place in which the contract was to be performed. However,
with contracts now being concluded by telephone, email, or WhatsApp, or by meetings at an airport or some other location, the
place in which the contract is finally concluded is often a matter of little or no significance.
3. 238
A modern set of conflict rules is that adopted in the Rome I Regulation, 333  which provides that, in the absence of an express
choice by the parties, ‘the contract shall be governed by the law of the country with which it is most closely connected’. 334  In
this regard, there is a rebuttable presumption that the contract is most closely connected with the country in which the party that
is to effect the ‘performance characteristic of the contract’ has its central administration, principal place of business, or other
place of business through which the performance is to be effected. 335
(e) Does an international arbitral tribunal have a lex fori?
3. 239
As already stated, conflict-of-law rules differ from one country to another. A judge or arbitral tribunal in one country may
select the applicable law by reference to the place where the contract was made, whereas in another country it may be selected
by reference to the law with which the contract has the closest connection. In short, the same question may produce different
answers, depending upon where the judge or arbitral tribunal happens to be sitting.
3. 240
In the context of international arbitration, this is plainly unsatisfactory. The seat of the arbitration is invariably chosen for
reasons that have nothing to do with the conflict rules of the law of the place of arbitration. This has led to the formulation of
a doctrine that has found support in both arbitration statutes and rules—namely, that, unlike the judge of a national court, an
international arbitral tribunal is not bound to follow the conflict-of-law rules of the country in which it has its seat. By way of
notable example, the Model Law states that:
Failing any designation by the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall apply the law determined by the conflict of laws
rules which it considers applicable. 336

Section E. - Conflict Rules and the Search for the..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
3. 241
A leading commentator has spoken of ‘the almost total abandonment of the application of the rules of conflict of the so-called
arbitral forum’, 337  and the point was emphasised in the Sapphire arbitration, 338  in which the tribunal commented that, unlike
the judge of a national court, an international arbitral tribunal has no lex fori:
Contrary to a State judge, who is bound to conform to the conflict law rules of the State in whose name he metes
out justice, the arbitrator is not bound by such rules. He must look for the common intention of the parties, and
use the connecting factors generally used in doctrine and in case law and must disregard national peculiarities. 339
This was an early enunciation of what has come to be known as the ‘direct choice’ (voie directe) method of choosing the
substantive law, which in reality gives arbitrators the freedom to choose as they please.
(f) International conventions, rules of arbitration, and national laws
3. 242
The ICSID Convention states that, in the absence of any choice of the applicable or governing law of the contract by the
parties, the arbitral tribunal must apply the law of the contracting state that is a party to the dispute, together with such rules
of international law as may be applicable. 340  The ICSID Convention, however, is necessarily concerned with states or state
entities. Accordingly, it follows the traditional practice of giving weight to the law of the state party to a contract, in the absence
of any choice of law.
3. 243
Other conventions are content to leave the choice to the arbitral tribunal. Article VII of the European Convention of 1961, for
instance, provides that ‘[f]ailing any indication by the parties as to the applicable law, the arbitrators shall apply the proper law
under the rules of conflict that the arbitrators deem applicable’. Although the European Convention of 1961 refers to ‘rules of
conflict’, these are not necessarily the rules of conflict of the country in which the arbitration has its seat; on the contrary, the
reference is to the conflict rules that the arbitrators deem applicable.
3. 244
A similar approach is adopted in some institutional rules, 341  as well as the Model Law. 342  The intention is to make it clear
that the arbitral tribunal is entitled to choose the governing law of the contract in the absence of any express or implied choice
of law by the parties themselves. In doing this, the arbitrators proceed objectively—but should they still be obliged to proceed
by way of particular conflict rules? The point may be academic, since in practice an arbitral tribunal will seek to apply the law
(or, if permitted, the rules of law) that it considers to be appropriate. Whether this choice is reached through conflict rules or
more directly may not matter.
3. 245
It should be noted, however, that French law omits any reference to conflict rules. This is both logical and sensible. French law
states that: ‘The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the rules of law chosen by the parties or, where
no such choice has been made, in accordance with the rules of law it considers appropriate.’ 343  This provision contains two
propositions: first, an international arbitral tribunal is not obliged to proceed to its choice of law by the adoption of any national
conflict of laws rules; and secondly, it is not obliged to choose a system of law as the substantive law of the contract, but may
instead choose such rules of law as it considers appropriate for the resolution of the dispute. 344  The trail blazed by French law
has since been followed by other countries, including Canada, India, Kenya, and the Netherlands. 345

Section E. - Conflict Rules and the Search for the..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
(g) Conclusion
3. 246
In reaching its decision on the law to be applied in the absence of any choice by the parties, an arbitral tribunal is entitled (unless
otherwise directed by the applicable rules or the lex arbitri) to select any of the systems or rules of law upon which the parties
themselves might have agreed, had they chosen to do so.
3. 247
When it comes to determining how an arbitral tribunal should proceed to its decision, then once again (as so often in international
arbitration) no universal rule can be identified. Some systems of law insist that, in making its choice, an arbitral tribunal should
follow the rules of conflict of the seat of the arbitration—an attitude that looks increasingly anachronistic. The modern tendency
is for international conventions and rules of arbitration to give considerable latitude to arbitral tribunals in making their choice
of law, whilst still requiring them to do so by way of appropriate or applicable conflict rules. Some national laws (including
the French, the Swiss, and the Dutch) carry the matter to its logical conclusion: by abandoning the reference to conflict rules
altogether, they allow an arbitral tribunal to decide for itself what law (or rules of law) the tribunal considers appropriate to
settle the dispute.
3. 248
This is an approach to be commended. If an arbitral tribunal can be trusted to decide a dispute, so too can it be trusted to
determine the set of legal rules by which it will be guided in reaching its decision. If the parties do not wish the arbitral tribunal
to have such freedom of action, the remedy is in their own hands: they should agree upon the applicable law or set of legal
rules, preferably in their contract, but if not, then at any time after the dispute has arisen. If they do not do so, it will fall to
the arbitral tribunal to make a decision that is likely to impact on the outcome of the arbitration. In order to reach this decision
(which may be given as a ruling on a preliminary issue by way of an interim or partial award), the arbitral tribunal will usually
have to consider detailed arguments of law and fact. This is an expense that could readily have been avoided if the parties had
taken the time and the trouble to agree on one of the many choices open to them.
Footnotes
323
See Mayer, ‘Reflections on the international arbitrator’s duty to apply the law: The 2000 Freshfields Lecture’ (2001)
17 Arb Intl 235, at 237–240, for a discussion of how arbitrators may not be bound to apply the law.
324
The report issued after the ILA’s Seventy-third Conference, held in Rio in August 2008. The Annex Resolution No.
6/2008 contains guidance split into the following sections: general considerations; acquiring information relevant to the
ascertainment of the applicable law; interaction with the parties; making use of information about the law’s content;
and guidance in special circumstances, e.g. where public policy is implicated. Recommendations of particular note
are: Recommendation 4, that the rules governing the ascertainment of the contents of law by national courts are not
necessarily suitable for arbitration and that arbitrators should not rely on unexpressed presumptions as to the contents
of the applicable law, including any presumption that it is the same as the law best known to the tribunal or to any of
its members, or even that it is the same as the law of the seat of arbitration; Recommendation 5, that arbitrators should
primarily receive information about the contents of the applicable law from the parties; and Recommendation 6, that
arbitrators should not introduce legal issues (propositions of law that may bear on the outcome of the dispute) that the
parties have not raised.
325
Rome I Regulation, Art. 3(1) (emphasis added).
326
Giuliano and Lagarde, Council Report on the Convention on the Law Applicable to Contractual Obligations, OJ C
282/1, 31 October 1980.
327
Ibid., at p. 17 (emphasis added). See also Collins (ed.) Dicey, Morris & Collins on the Conflict of Laws (15th edn, Sweet
& Maxwell, 2018), pp. 1809ff.
328
UNCITRAL Rules 1976, Art. 33.1.
329
UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 35.1; ICC Rules 2021, Art. 21.1.

Section E. - Conflict Rules and the Search for the..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
330
See, e.g., Swiss PIL, art. 187(1).
331
Rome I Regulation, Art. 4; see also Collins (ed.) Dicey, Morris & Collins on the Conflict of Laws (15th edn, Sweet
& Maxwell, 2018), pp. 1818ff, for a commentary on this provision of the Convention, which is based on Swiss and,
subsequently, Dutch law.
332
See Arbitration Institute of the SCC, Stockholm Arbitration Report (SCC, 2002), p. 59, with commentary by Fernandez-
Armesto.
333
It is worth noting that arbitral agreements are expressly excluded from the scope of the Convention by Art. 1(2)(d), but
the discussion in the present section is about contracts as a whole and not about a separate (or separable) agreement
to arbitrate.
334
Rome I Regulation, Art. 4(1).
335
Rome I Regulation, Art. 4(2).
336
Model Law, Art. 28.
337
Goldman, ‘La lex mercatoria dans les contrats et l’arbitrage internationaux: Réalité et perspectives’ [1979] J du Droit
Intl 475, at 491.
338
Sapphire International Petroleum Ltd v The National Iranian Oil Co. (1964) 13 ICLQ 1011.
339
Ibid.
340
ICSID Convention, Art. 42(1).
341
See, e.g., the UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 35.1 (‘The arbitral tribunal shall apply the rules of law designated by the
parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute. Failing such designation by the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall
apply the law which it determines to be appropriate’ (emphasis added)).
342
Model Law, Art. 28(2).
343
French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1511. The same formulation is now used at Art. 35 of the UNCITRAL Rules 2010.
344
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 21.1; LCIA Rules 2020, Art. 22.3. The SCC Rules 2017, Art. 27.1, and WIPO Rules, Art. 59.a,
also endorse the direct approach.
345
In Canada, by the Ontario International Commercial Arbitration Act 2017, s. 7; in India, the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act 1996 (as amended in 2022), s. 28(1)(b)(iii); in Kenya, the Arbitration Act 1995 (as amended in 2010), s. 29(3); in
the Netherlands, the Arbitration Act 2015, s. 1054(2). Swiss law also comes close to the same position, in the Swiss
PIL, s. 187.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
