Section C. - Preliminary Steps, UKBC-REDFERN 530638639 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section C. - Preliminary Steps
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 6 - Conduct of the Proceedings
Section C. - Preliminary Steps
(a) Introduction
(i) Case management conferences
6. 40
Preliminary procedural hearings at a very early stage of a dispute resolution process may not be customary in some countries.
Nevertheless, particularly where the parties and their representatives come from different legal systems or different cultural
backgrounds, it is sensible for the tribunal to arrange for a conference with the parties, remotely if necessary, as early as
possible in the proceedings. This ensures that the arbitral tribunal and the parties have a common understanding of how
the arbitration is to be conducted, and enables a carefully designed framework for the conduct of the arbitration to be
established. 49  Nowadays, it is common practice for such a case management conference to be conducted by teleconference
or video-conference. 50  This saves the costs inevitably incurred when one (or more) of the arbitrators or counsel has to travel
across national boundaries, and it also makes it easier for all participants to find common periods of availability that can
reduce scheduling delays.
6. 41
Some institutional rules make it mandatory to hold a ‘preliminary meeting’, 51  or ‘case management conference’ 52  whilst
others provide for such a meeting to be convened at the discretion of the tribunal. 53
6. 42
In practice, a first case management conference often proceeds through various stages. The members of the arbitral tribunal
usually arrange to convene privately, before meeting the parties. This is partly to effect introductions and partly to discuss
provisional views as to the organisation of the arbitration.
6. 43
Similarly, substantial benefits may be gained if the representatives of the parties have an opportunity to discuss procedural
and administrative matters before attending the conference with the arbitral tribunal. This is particularly important in ad hoc
arbitrations since issues such as the fees and expenses of the arbitrators are generally dealt with at this stage. 54
(ii) Representation at case management conferences
6. 44
In order to obtain the maximum benefit from a case management conference with the arbitral tribunal, each party should
be represented by persons with sufficient authority and knowledge of the case to take ‘on the spot’ decisions, both in any
discussion with the other party’s representatives and during the course of the meeting with the arbitral tribunal itself. This
means that it is usually necessary for the leader of each party’s team of lawyers, as well as a person with appropriate executive
authority from the client itself, to attend.

Section C. - Preliminary Steps, UKBC-REDFERN 530638639 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
(iii) Items to be covered at case management conferences
6. 45
It would be unusual for a preliminary meeting to extend beyond one day, as a maximum, and it may well be disposed of
within half a day or less. The items to be addressed at a case management conference will focus on the need to establish
terms of appointment of the arbitral tribunal (or Terms of Reference in ICC Proceedings), and a Procedural Order No. 1,
including most notably a procedural schedule.
6. 46
In particular, the procedure and schedule for the following items will usually be addressed during a preliminary meeting: 55
 
• preliminary issues—such as jurisdictional objections, any applications for interim relief, and bifurcation;
 
• written submissions—including their structure and length, how many there are to be, their timing, and whether they
are to be accompanied by documentary and witness evidence;
 
• document production, including use of the Redfern Schedule;
 
• witnesses—including their number, the timing of submission of witness statements or expert reports, and any use of
tribunal-appointed experts;
 
• the pre-hearing conference—including the venue and timing;
 
• the evidentiary hearing—whether actual or remote, and a target date for it;
 
• other procedural and administrative matters—such as the use as guidelines of the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence
in International Arbitration, the chairman’s power to make procedural orders alone, the appointment of an arbitral
secretary, the means of communication with the tribunal, and cybersecurity and data protection measures to be adopted
during the arbitration.
(iv) Preparation for the case management conference
6. 47
As mentioned in the last section, discussions will have taken place between the members of the arbitral tribunal as they
prepare for the case management conference; and between the parties’ counsel, in the hope of reaching agreement on as many
procedural questions as possible. This is sensible. The members of the tribunal will need to establish a common approach
between themselves; and, whatever grievances the parties may have against each other, it is in their common interest that
the arbitral proceedings should proceed smoothly and efficiently and indeed, upon an agreed basis, to the extent that this
is possible.
6. 48
Arbitral tribunals usually prefer to avoid making rulings on disputed procedural matters in the early stages of the arbitration.
Where there is disagreement between the parties, arbitrators often suggest compromise solutions. This is probably a matter of
tribunal psychology, 56  in consequence of which individual members of the tribunal (and particularly the presiding arbitrator)
are reluctant to make decisions at the very start of the arbitration that one of the parties may regard (however unjustifiably)
as unfair or partial.
6. 49
Nevertheless, if at the end of the case management conference, there are matters outstanding upon which the parties are
unable to agree, the arbitral tribunal must make a decision. Sometimes, this is done immediately; sometimes, it is reserved
and notified to the parties later.

Section C. - Preliminary Steps, UKBC-REDFERN 530638639 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
(v) UNCITRAL Notes on Organizing Arbitral Proceedings
6. 50
It may be useful, at the beginning of an arbitration, for arbitrators, or indeed for parties or counsel who are not used to
international arbitration, to consult the UNCITRAL Notes on Organizing Arbitral Proceedings. They provide a list of matters
that the parties and the tribunal may wish to consider in establishing the procedural rules for their arbitration. Some of these
—such as establishing the language of the arbitration—are fairly obvious. Others are more helpful, including arrangements
to protect the confidentiality of proprietary information, arrangements for the exchange of memorials and other written
submissions, means of communication between the parties (including the extent to which email, or other electronic forms
of communication should be used), and so forth.
(vi) ‘Procedural Order No. 1’
6. 51
Many experienced international arbitrators have their own model forms of procedural orders. Often, these are sent to the
parties’ counsel as a first step towards discussing and agreeing the terms of the first procedural order, which will establish
an overall procedural scheme for the arbitration. Such a procedural order will usually include dates (or time limits) for
the delivery of submissions, for the production of documents and witness statements, and for the production and exchange
of expert reports. It may also contain provisional dates for a witness hearing. A procedural order of this type serves as a
useful guideline to the parties and to the tribunal in discussing what is required for the actual arbitration with which they are
concerned. However, there is a very real risk that the use of such ‘model forms’, which often go into a considerable degree
of detail and which have been drawn up as a template for a ‘model arbitration’, may lead to the adoption of rigid procedures
that are not appropriately tailored to the particular dispute in question. Indeed, the automatic (one might almost say ‘lazy’)
reliance by a tribunal on procedures devised for other arbitrations may lead to a failure on the part of that tribunal to acquire
a proper understanding of the case and a consequent failure to deliver one of the key procedural ‘promises’ of arbitration
—namely, ‘tailor-made efficiency’.
(b) Preliminary issues
6. 52
One of the elements that may emerge from the process of formulating Procedural Order No. 1 is whether or not there are some
issues that should be decided as ‘preliminary issues’ or ‘separate issues’. Apart from jurisdictional issues, 57  other questions
may arise that either should be determined as preliminary issues before the arbitral tribunal considers the substance of the claims
or, alternatively, may be dealt with more conveniently at an early stage as separate issues, in order to facilitate the efficient and
economical conduct of the proceedings.
(i) ‘Bifurcation’ of liability and quantum
6. 53
A question that often arises is whether or not issues of liability and quantum should be dealt with separately. In many modern
disputes arising out of international trade and commerce, particularly in relation to construction projects or intellectual
property disputes, the quantification of claims is a major exercise. It is likely to involve both the parties and the arbitral
tribunal in considering large numbers of documents, as well as complex technical matters involving experts appointed by the
parties, or by the arbitral tribunal, or sometimes both. In such cases, there may well be savings in costs and overall efficiency
if the arbitral tribunal determines questions of liability first. In this way, the parties will avoid the expense and time involved

Section C. - Preliminary Steps, UKBC-REDFERN 530638639 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
in submitting evidence and argument on detailed aspects of quantification that may turn out to be irrelevant following the
arbitral tribunal’s decision on liability. 58
6. 54
There are sometimes clear arguments in favour of separating issues of liability from issues of quantum in a large and complex
case. For example, a claimant may have suffered a substantial loss (including loss of profit) as a result of the breakdown
or failure of an important piece of plant or equipment. The claimant may seek to recover this loss by way of arbitration
proceedings against a respondent responsible for the manufacture and/or installation of the equipment. In its defence, the
respondent may allege, first, that it is the supplier (and not the respondent) who is liable for any breakdown or failure in
the plant or equipment supplied: secondly, that liability is limited under the terms of the contract to a sum much smaller
than the amount claimed; and, thirdly, and in any event, some of the losses claimed (such as loss of profit) are irrecoverable
(because of the conditions of contract or the governing law) and others are not fully recoverable, because they have been
quantified on the wrong basis.
6. 55
This is a common situation in international disputes, with the respondent putting forward a succession of defences, any one
of which, if successful, may limit—or even defeat—the claim. How should an arbitral tribunal deal with such a situation?
6. 56
There are various possibilities. For example, the tribunal might decide to hear legal argument as to the effect of the clause
limiting liability on the basis that if the clause is found to be effective the respondent may be prepared to pay the limited
amount stated in the clause and the case will then be concluded.
6. 57
At first sight, this seems to be an attractive option for both parties. There is no point in spending time and money on a
complicated factual investigation if the dispute may be resolved by the determination of a legal point as a preliminary issue.
It may emerge, however, that the correct legal interpretation to be put upon the clause that limits, or purports to limit, liability
depends on the facts—and that, in order to ascertain and understand the factual situation, it is necessary to enquire fully into
all of the circumstances of the case, with the assistance of both fact and expert witnesses on each side. Thus, the findings of
the arbitral tribunal on the legal issue might be so dependent on its finding on the fact issues as to make it difficult (and indeed
undesirable) to disentangle them. In this event, it would be appropriate for the arbitral tribunal to investigate the relevant
facts rather than to attempt to deal with the legal issue in isolation.
6. 58
Although, in practice, issues of liability and quantum may, from time to time, prove to be inextricably interwoven, it is
sometimes possible to see a broad division between them. It is also sometimes possible for the arbitral tribunal to determine
the principles on which damages should be awarded, while leaving the appropriate calculations to be agreed between the
parties or to be determined by the tribunal at a later stage.
(ii) Separation of other issues
6. 59
It is rarer for an arbitral tribunal to separate issues where there is no clear dividing line—to say, in effect, ‘there are only a
limited number of issues on which we wish to hear evidence and argument from the parties, and these are as follows’. This
course should not be attempted lightly. Before an arbitral tribunal can safely isolate some of the issues for its attention, it must
be satisfied that it has been adequately informed of all of the issues that are relevant or likely to be relevant to its decision.
This stage is not likely to be reached until the written phase of the proceedings is under way. Where, however, an arbitral
tribunal is satisfied that it has been adequately briefed on all of the issues and that the time has come for it to take the initiative
in this way, the effect can be dramatic in terms of saving both time and money.
6. 60
The Aminoil arbitration provides a classic example. 59  Many hundreds of millions of dollars were at stake, depending upon
whether the Kuwait government’s act of nationalisation was unlawful (as claimed by Aminoil), thereby giving rise to the

Section C. - Preliminary Steps, UKBC-REDFERN 530638639 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
possibility of an award of damages on a full indemnity basis, which would have a punitive effect, or lawful (as the government
claimed), and thus susceptible to resolution by the payment of fair compensation.
6. 61
At the close of the written stage of the proceedings, the arbitral tribunal convened a meeting with the parties and their counsel
to consider various procedural matters relating to the forthcoming oral hearings. Following this meeting, the arbitral tribunal
made an order fixing the hearing date in Paris and specifying, amongst other things, seven specific issues that the parties
should address, the order in which they would be taken, and which side should speak first on each issue. This is how the
hearing was conducted—and there is no doubt that this intervention by the arbitral tribunal led to a significant saving in time
and money for both parties, and, in the end, to an outcome that both parties regarded as fair. 60
6. 62
At that time, in the early 1980s, it was relatively rare for an arbitral tribunal to take control of the proceedings in this
way. 61  However, since then, international arbitrations have become more complex and costly. As both arbitral tribunals and
practitioners search for quicker and more cost-effective ways of handling disputes, it seems essential that arbitrators should
seek to direct the conduct of arbitrations from an early stage—and, in particular, that they should seek to cut through the
foliage in order to reach the root issues as quickly as possible.
6. 63
Although, like the shipowner mentioned earlier, 62  the parties can agree to dismiss the arbitrators if they jointly lose
confidence in them, it is no longer appropriate for arbitrators to sit passively behind their tables and say to themselves, ‘this
is clearly the wrong way of conducting this case, but the parties have agreed to do it like this so we’ll go along with it’. 63
6. 64
To this end, some commentators have advocated the introduction of an early opportunity for the tribunal to discuss the merits
of the case, offering preliminary observations, prior to the main evidentiary hearing so as to help focus the parties’ ongoing
efforts and the evidentiary debate. This can take the form of either an early hearing for opening arguments before the main
evidential hearing, or a substantive ‘case review conference’ following the first full exchange of a first round of statements of
claim and defence. 64  Such a way of proceeding would permit an arbitral tribunal to be actively involved in the streamlining
of procedures to focus on those issues and evidence that, once they are informed in detail of the parties’ cases, are likely to be
material to the outcome of the case. The timing of such ‘Kaplan Opening’ or ‘case review conference’ would be key. They
cannot happen too early, for example at the first case management conference, because at that stage arbitrators and counsel
often do not have sufficient information about the case to reach informed decisions about the most efficient procedure to
be followed. In the same way, such a ‘case review conference’ should not happen too late in the process, because that will
defeat the purpose. Timed well, such early engagement by the tribunal in the substantive issues can be effective in fulfilling
arbitration’s promise as a tailored and efficient process.
Footnotes
49
It is necessary to distinguish between a preliminary meeting (or preliminary hearing) and a pre-hearing conference. A
preliminary meeting takes place as early as possible in the proceedings, and certainly before the written stage. A pre-
hearing conference takes place after the written stage, and has as its primary objective the organisation and order of
proceedings at the evidentiary hearing.
50
ICSID reported that, in 2019, the year before the COVID-19 pandemic, ‘about 60 per cent of the 200 hearings and
sessions organized by ICSID were held by video-conference’. ICSID News Releases, A Brief Guide to Online Hearings
at ICSID, 24 March 2020.
51
SIAC Rules, r. 19.3; DIAC Rules, Art. 22.
52
ICC Rules, Art. 24. See also ICC Rules, Appendix IV (‘Case Management Techniques’).
53
AAA Rules, Art. 21 (and Sections P-1 and P-2); ICDR Rules, Art. 22.2. Most rules require the tribunal to consult with
the parties before it prepares the procedural timetable for the arbitration: see, e.g., ICSID Rules, r. 29; HKIAC Rules,
Art. 13.2; SCC Rules, Art. 28. See also UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 17.2.

Section C. - Preliminary Steps, UKBC-REDFERN 530638639 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
54
To avoid awkwardness, it is important that the representatives of the parties should be able to present an agreed position
to the arbitral tribunal on the question of the arbitrators’ fees and expenses.
55
See also Böckstiegel, ‘Party autonomy and case management: Experiences and suggestions of an arbitrator’ [2013]
SchiedsVZ 1.
56
See Chapter 9.
57
See Chapter 5.
58
See also the discussion of partial and interim awards in relation to the separation of liability and quantum in Chapter 9.
See also ICC Rules, Appendix IV, para. (a); ICDR Rules, Art. 22.4; AAA Rules, Art. 32.b; SIAC Rules, r. 19.4.
59
See Redfern, ‘The arbitration between the Government of Kuwait and Aminoil’ (1984) 55 BYIL 65.
60
See Hunter and Sinclair, ‘ Aminoil revisited: Reflections on a story of changing circumstances’, in Weiler (ed.)
International Investment Law and Arbitration: Leading Cases from the ICSID, NAFTA, Bilateral Treaties and Customary
International Law (Cameron May, 2005), pp. 347-381.
61
Note that a number of sets of institutional rules permit the tribunal to ‘direct the parties to focus their presentations on
issues the decision of which could dispose of all or part of the case’: ICDR Rules, Art. 22.3; SIAC Rules, r. 19.4. See
also ICC Rules, Appendix IV, para. (a); LCIA Rules, Art. 19.2.
62
See paragraph 6.03.
63
In this vein, one arbitrator has remarked, ‘I am sometimes shocked when I write the award that although we heard 25
witnesses, I am only referring to two, and I think, “why did we spend time hearing them, why did the parties bear the costs
of preparing them [ … ]” ’: ‘Due process must trump efficiency, says Derains’, Global Arb Rev, 23 September 2014.
64
Kaplan, ‘If it ain’t broke, don’t change it’ (2014) 80 Arbitration 172. See also Partasides and Vesel, ‘A case review
conference, or arbitration in two acts’ (2015) 81 Arbitration 167.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
