Section F. - State Responsibility for Wrongful Setting Aside, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section F. - State Responsibility for Wrongful Setting Aside
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 10 - Challenge of Arbitral Awards
Section F. - State Responsibility for Wrongful Setting Aside
10. 93
If an award is set aside, is that the end of the story for the party seeking annulment? Does the winning party have any recourse
when an award is vacated for parochial or other inappropriate grounds? What happens where, for example, a state’s courts
set aside an award against a state-owned company or an otherwise well-connected national of that state? Put another way, if
setting-aside applications are governed by national law, does a state have carte blanche to determine when and where to annul?
In investment arbitration, there are cases that suggest that states may be held responsible under international law for egregious
actions by their courts in the setting-aside process and in some instances, claimants have secured awards in international courts
and tribunals, granting them damages representing the full amount of their previously annulled arbitral awards. 150
10. 94
In one scenario, a decision to set aside an award may constitute a breach of a state’s obligations under an investment treaty.
For example, in Saipem v Bangladesh, 151  a case under the ICSID Rules, the respondent was held liable to the claimant for
having unlawfully set aside an award by abusing its supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitral process. Bangladesh was thus held
responsible for the expropriation of Saipem’s ICC award. 152  The investment arbitration tribunal awarded the claimant the full
value of its annulled ICC award.
10. 95
In a second scenario, inappropriate judicial conduct in setting-aside proceedings may breach a state’s obligations under
international human rights treaties. Most notably, the ECHR affords individuals a means of suing signatory states directly before
the ECtHR for violation of their rights under the Convention. This is what happened in the case of BEG SpA v Italy discussed
above where Italy was held liable for its conduct in set-aside proceedings by wrongly upholding an award rendered in breach
of the claimant’s rights under Article 6 ECHR. 153
Footnotes
150
King and Moloo, ‘Enforcement after the arbitration: Strategic considerations and forum choice’, in Ferrari (ed.) Forum
Shopping in the International Commercial Arbitration Context (Sellier European Law, 2013), pp. 411–412, at 493.
151
Saipem SpA v People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Award, 30 June 2009 (finding Bangladesh
liable for its illegal judicial expropriation of Saipem’s rights, as crystallised in its award).
152
Ibid., at [127] finding that ‘[t]he ICC Award crystallized the parties’ rights and obligations under the original contract’,
thereby constituting an investment for the purposes of both the Italy–Bangladesh BIT and the ICSID Convention.
153
See BEG SpA v Italy (Case 5212/11), Judgment of 20 May 2021 discussed at paragraph 10.54 above.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
