Statement of Acceptance, Availability, etc., UKBC-ICCARBN 474406950 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Statement of Acceptance, Availability, etc.
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Statement of Acceptance, Availability, etc.
29-39
The candidate selected by the ICC Court’s President to act as Emergency Arbitrator must fill out and sign a Statement of
Acceptance, Availability, Impartiality and Independence, pursuant to art.2(5) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. 564  Its content
is close to, but not identical to, the one foreseen in art.11(2) of the Rules for any arbitrator that is to be appointed or confirmed
under the Rules. 565  The main distinction is that the potential nominee as Emergency Arbitrator acknowledges that: (i) other
persons may have been contacted to be Emergency Arbitrator; (ii) the Emergency Arbitrator will be paid in accordance with
the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions; and (iii) the Emergency Arbitrator must be in position to devote the time necessary in
accordance with the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions. The prospective Emergency Arbitrator is required to disclose in writing
to the Secretariat any facts or circumstances which might be of such a nature as to call into question the Emergency Arbitrator’s
independence in the eyes of the parties. If the prospective Emergency Arbitrator submits a qualified statement of independence,
it is unlikely that the ICC Court’s President will proceed with the appointment, as any risk of challenge and objections by a
party must be avoided in these circumstances. 566
29-40
The requirement of availability needs particular attention by the prospective Emergency Arbitrator and by the President of the
ICC Court, who will typically prefer the candidates with the most flexible schedule for the period at stake. 567  In essence, the
Emergency Arbitrator must be in a position to confirm substantial availability for a period of at least the subsequent 15 days,
since that is the time the Emergency Arbitrator has to issue an Order and the ICC Secretariat asks for commitments over the
following two-month period.
29-41
The Secretariat provides a copy of the Emergency Arbitrator’s statement to the parties, pursuant to art.2(5) (second sentence) of
the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. In practice, this will be done at the same time that the appointment of the Emergency Arbitrator
is notified to the parties as per art.2(3) (first sentence) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules.
Footnotes
564
Typically, all potential candidates that are contacted by the Secretariat for a potential matter as to their availablity
and interest, will be asked to fill out such statement, which is then available when the President selects the candidate
and makes the appointment, see Carlevarisn & Feris, “Running in the Emergency Arbitration Rules: The First Ten
Cases” [2014] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.25 No.1, p.30.
565
See App.II, Doc.4.3.
566
Leaving aside disclosure that are de minimis in nature, see Carlevaris & Feris, “Running in the Emergency Arbitration
Rules: The First Ten Cases” [2014] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.25 No.1, p.31.
567
Carlevaris & Feris, “Running in the Emergency Arbitration Rules: The First Ten Cases” [2014] ICC ICArb. Bull.
Vol.25 No.1, p.31.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
