Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 6 - Arbitration
A Practical Guide to Effective Dispute Resolution: Methods & Clauses 1st Ed.
Mainwork
Part 2 - Binding Dispute Resolution Methods and Clauses
Chapter 6 - Arbitration
Overview of international arbitration as a method of dispute resolution
6-001
Unlike the non-binding methods of alternative dispute resolution (e.g. negotiation or mediation) discussed in this book,
arbitration provides an out of court mechanism for reaching a binding and legally enforceable resolution of the parties’ dispute.
It is adversarial in nature and sees an impartial tribunal, appointed pursuant to the parties’ arbitration agreement, render a
legally enforceable decision, which determines the outcome of the dispute. These decisions are known as awards and, subject to
limited rights of appeal or challenge, are determinative of the parties’ rights and obligations. In this sense, arbitration is closer
to litigation before a court, than, for example, to mediation.
Arbitration is entirely dependent on the parties’ consent and is a matter of contract, without which it cannot take place. Unlike
a court, which exercises sovereign authority, an arbitral tribunal only has jurisdiction over the parties and their dispute through
the parties’ express agreement. An agreement to submit to arbitration also comes with a negative promise not to take the dispute
to any other forum, meaning to courts. 1
The tribunal’s jurisdiction and powers are defined by the parties’ agreement, in conjunction with any applicable mandatory legal
rules of arbitration in the chosen seat (or legal place) of arbitration. 2  Typically, parties to a commercial contract who wish to
include a dispute resolution clause will stipulate that any and all disputes arising between them in relation to the contract shall
be referred to, and finally resolved by, arbitration. Although it is possible to agree to submit a dispute to arbitration once it has
arisen, in practice, it can be harder for parties already in dispute to reach agreement on such matters, as each party is likely to
be manoeuvring for an advantage. At the drafting stage of the agreement, when no dispute exists between the parties, they are
normally more minded to collaborate to achieve a positive outcome in the form of a deal/contract. After a dispute has arisen,
positions can quickly become polarised with the relationship becoming antagonistic. This can make any agreement difficult to
reach even in relation to less important points.
As arbitration relies on the consent of the parties, they have significant control over the process. This includes deciding on who
the decision-makers (being arbitrators) are going to be, the number of arbitrators, what law and rules apply to their dispute, and
what powers the arbitrators will have. This control gives flexibility to the parties as to how their dispute can be resolved but
also imposes more responsibility on their legal team as to agreeing and prescribing those choices.
Drafting an effective and operational arbitration clause is critical to the success of any subsequent arbitration proceedings.
In the extreme case, if something crucial was not agreed in advance and captured in the arbitration agreement, this can lead to the
failure of the arbitration agreement. If this happens, the dispute can collapse into litigation, or the parties can find themselves at
a standstill. An example of an arbitration clause that can fail is one that sets out an ambiguous or irrelevant scope (for example,
because of cutting and pasting from an old agreement) such that it is not clear whether the agreement covers the dispute in
question. In this scenario, if the parties are in disagreement, the resolution of the dispute by arbitration will be impaired, resulting
in significant unexpected legal costs and/or ultimately resulting in a different mechanism of resolving the dispute than the one
originally chosen by the parties (namely, litigation as a default mechanism).
However, whilst the wording of an effective arbitration clause is critical, the requirements are relatively straightforward, and
lawyers should not be discouraged from including such a clause. Whatever the source of the wording, it follows that a lawyer
who bases their clause on a precedent or institutional template must fully understand the implications of their chosen wording.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
What makes international arbitration an effective method of dispute
resolution?
6-002
The primary advantages of arbitration as a method of dispute resolution arise from the characteristic that, once arbitration has
been chosen, the parties can mutually agree almost any element of the procedures that they want the arbitrator to follow. Hence
the parties are able to choose the applicable procedural law, arbitration rules, number and choice of arbitrators, confidentiality,
language and venue.
In comparison to litigation, the ability of the parties to choose procedure, applicable laws, tribunal, language, venue, etc. enables
parties to shape the arbitration proceedings in the most effective way. 3  This flexibility means that, even if the parties have not
made the relevant choices in advance, they can still do that once the dispute arises or even if the proceedings have started. The
key is that the parties can make changes provided they agree.
Moreover, in arbitration proceedings, the parties can agree various points of procedure by consent, including the deadlines for
submission of pleadings and evidence. In this way, arbitration proceedings are much more flexible and agile than litigation
proceedings, which are often determined by strict procedural rules applicable to a court of a particular jurisdiction. This
characteristic also allows the parties to tailor the relevant procedures to align with the legal systems that they are most familiar
with. In this sense, arbitration as a process for dispute resolution can be considered to be truly international.
The hearings can be held in a particular location that is agreeable to the parties and the tribunal, allowing them to choose a
flexible in-person venue that best meets their needs. The parties can also make an active choice for the proceedings to be heard
remotely with a number of institutions now providing useful guidance on conducting remote hearings (see Chapter Nine). This
flexibility allows the parties to save costs on travel and to choose the most convenient location for the proceedings, as well as to
choose the time and date depending on preferences and/or convenience to the parties, the tribunal and other hearing participants.
The parties are also able to choose their tribunal and the number of arbitrators that meets an agreed set of criteria including
skills, knowledge and experience. This is in complete contrast to the seemingly random assignment of judges in civil courts
and is a significant advantage of arbitration.
An important and distinctive advantage of arbitration is the enforceability of an award. This is embedded in the choice of
arbitration itself and arises from the application of the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards (1958) (New York Convention), as well as the certainty that stems from the very limited grounds under
which an award can be challenged (see further discussion in para.6-032).
The choices that the parties can make when drafting arbitration clauses are considered in more detail later in this chapter.
Institutional v ad hoc arbitration
6-003
Parties can decide whether to run the arbitration proceedings themselves on an ad hoc basis, or have the arbitration administered
by an arbitral institution. The structure of the arbitration clause, as well as what needs to be considered in it, will also be
determined by this choice. There are well-established and long-standing arbitral institutions in operation around the world and
new centres continue to be set up. The oldest and largest institutions include the London Court of International Arbitration
(LCIA, 1892); London Chamber of Arbitration and Mediation (previously London Chamber of Arbitration) (LCAM, 1903);
the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC, 1923); and American Arbitration Association/International Centre for Dispute
Resolution (AAA/ICDR, 1926). With the growth of global trade, other institutions appeared in the 1960s and have grown
significantly. 4  More recently, there has also been the emergence of new institutions with a regional focus. 5  As a result, if
geographical location is important to the parties, there is a high probability that there will be an easily accessible institution
wherever the parties are located, even though some may be less well established and the administration capabilities may vary.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
All institutions have their own rules, which are largely designed to expand on the applicable procedural laws of the selected
jurisdiction and the details of the parties’ arbitration agreement. In some senses, these rules may be considered analogous to
the rules of court, although they are significantly less detailed. However, like rules of court, arbitration rules guide the parties
and the arbitral tribunal in more detail as to how the proceedings are to be conducted. Although institutional rules can resemble
the ad hoc UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (UNCITRAL Rules), 6  care should be taken to make sure that the rules are fully
understood before selecting an institution.
Whilst it may be tempting for the parties to agree an ad hoc arbitration, they need to be aware that an arbitral institution typically
provides an independent administration service, and this can be important if the relations between the parties have broken
down. In the absence of the involvement of an arbitral institution, if the parties have to resolve disputed administration matters
themselves, it is not uncommon for the financial and time costs to exceed those of an institutional tribunal.
It is also possible to provide for a limited role for the selected arbitration institution, for example, for it to act as an appointing
authority for the tribunal appointment. This can either be because the arbitration agreement provides for such a mechanism, or
because the mechanism provided did not lead to the parties’ agreement on which arbitrators to appoint and there is a need for
an independent institution to make such an appointment in the absence of an agreement.
Some institutions are prepared to provide such a service with a number of institutions expressly offering to administer
UNCITRAL Rules arising from an arbitration agreement that does not specify that their institutional rules apply. 7  It is always
good to check with the institution before including such a provision in the arbitration agreement. Otherwise, if the selected
institution is not prepared to act as such, this could lead to unnecessary delays, disagreements, and further challenges to the
jurisdiction of the eventually constituted arbitral tribunal, which may only escalate the dispute and costs involved.
From a practical point of view, there are other benefits to having the arbitration administered by an experienced, competent
arbitral institution. It may have the benefit of providing confidence to the parties’ stakeholders that the arbitral proceedings will
be properly conducted. This is particularly important if there is a concern that there could be any natural justice/public policy
arguments from a losing party at the enforcement stage. At the same time, this could avoid any issues in relation to the process
and administration of the arbitrations of newly developed institutions.
On the other hand, a benefit of using a newly developed institution can be a reduction in the fees that some may make to promote
wider usage of their institution. It could also be that the institution provides for more specific regional cover with arbitrators
available to accommodate the language requirements of a particular arbitration agreement or having better cultural or legal
knowledge of the issues in dispute. 8  The question is ultimately whether the institution is known to administer international
arbitrations in the context of possible disputes in the industry and region involved, and what its track record is. This should be
considered in the context of its fees and potential value of the disputes at stake.
Especially for smaller cases, the question of fees is one of the reasons why parties may decide to have an ad hoc arbitration, as
opposed to an institutional arbitration. This is because the institutional fees that need to be paid on the top of the arbitrator’s fees
may be high relative to the value of the dispute. To avoid surprises, before specifying a particular institution in an arbitration
clause, the fee structure should be considered as the fees are often linked to the value of the dispute although, in some cases,
the fees can adjust to the nature of the dispute.
Some institutions also have fee structures based on an hourly rate or a combination of hourly rate and total value of the claim.
One example of this is the Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre (HKIAC) where the administrative fees are determined
by the value of the claim but the costs of the arbitral tribunal are set out on an hourly basis. 9  The LCIA is a notable exception
with its administration fees being purely determined according to an hourly rate. 10  Having said that, although the services
provided by an arbitral institution in administering a case come with a cost, the experience and expertise of the institution can
be very important, particularly where relations between the parties have broken down.
However, the question of cost is not the only reason why the parties may decide to choose ad hoc instead of institutional
arbitrations. Whilst it is especially good for inexperienced parties and arbitrators to delegate the bulk of administration to
an institution, if all participants in the process are experienced enough and focus on resolving the dispute, rather than on its
escalation, then ad hoc arbitration can offer some unique opportunities. These include the flexibility and full control over the
process if an agreement on procedural points can be reached.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
By agreement, parties can also decide on the process within a broad framework provided by, for example, UNCITRAL Rules. As
quite a lot is left to the discretion of the arbitral tribunal, parties are free to agree on the specifics or put the points of procedural
disagreement to the arbitral tribunal to decide and for them to specify these in its procedural orders.
This relies on the parties’ willingness to cooperate with the overall arbitration process and be reasonable in terms of their conduct.
If the parties are not driven by these considerations, an ad hoc process could become disrupted. Without the additional safeguards
and administration by the institution, the management of the arbitration process may end up dependent on the experience of
the tribunal in managing this type of arbitration.
At the time of drafting the arbitration clause, it may not be apparent how parties will behave at the time of any dispute arising.
As a result, it can be a safer option to provide for institutional rules to apply and for administration by the selected institution.
To help in deciding, the parties should consider whether the industry practice for the underlying contract/parties suggests a
different approach.
If, however, after a dispute arises, the reality of the dispute or relationship between the parties requires more flexibility in the
process and a pre-selected institutional arbitration does not satisfy this requirement, with the consent of all parties before the start
of the process, a different process can be agreed and tailored to the demands of the dispute to be resolved in an effective manner.
If the choice is in favour of an administered arbitration, drafters should consider the standard or model arbitration clauses
provided by the institution chosen (examples of clauses from a range of global institutions are given in Appendix Four of this
book). Arbitral institutions often provide model arbitration clauses that are tailored to the rules of a particular institution and
can relatively easily be incorporated into contracts by contract drafters. If UNCITRAL Rules are used, there are also standard
clauses that can be incorporated (see the next section in more detail on this point).
This would be the starting point. However, drafters should also consider whether the wording of the chosen arbitration clause
needs to be adjusted or whether the chosen arbitration clause is clear enough and includes all the elements that need to be
incorporated.
Characteristics of an effective arbitration clause
6-004
There are certain essential characteristics that every arbitration clause requires in order to be effective and operable. An effective
arbitration clause must be made in writing to facilitate enforcement under the New York Convention. 11  It should include such
points as a clear and unequivocal agreement between the parties to submit to arbitration, as well as the choice of “seat”.
In addition, there are other features that, whilst not essential to the enforceability of a clause, are strongly recommended to
aid its practical operation, such as a choice of arbitration rules, the language of the proceedings, the number of arbitrators, any
qualifications or restrictions on nationality, and a mechanism for their appointment. The parties can also decide to add other
elements to their arbitration clause, driven by the particular characteristics of their transaction. The addition of wording can add
complexity and increase the possibility of subsequent dispute, so needs to be considered very carefully.
Clear and sufficiently detailed
6-005
It is important to be specific and clear when drafting a dispute resolution clause. If the meaning of the words in the clause is
unclear or ambiguous, this can lead to expensive and time-consuming litigation in national courts or take valuable time of the
tribunal to resolve this ambiguity. Moreover, ambiguity can also lead to challenges to the award itself. Such challenges can be
made either by attempting to set the award aside or resisting the enforcement of the award in the relevant national courts.
At the same time, an overdetailed or overcomplicated arbitration clause can lead to further arguments as to the meaning of
the clause and its effect. This is particularly so if it is drafted containing internal inconsistencies. In addition, a very lengthy

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
and detailed clause may lead to inefficient and expensive procedures if adopted to cover a low-value dispute or one that only
involves a straightforward consideration of facts. Such a clause may also be too rigid and might not allow parties to deal with
a specific dispute in the most effective way, possibly adding unnecessary costs and time.
When drafting an arbitration clause, the right balance needs to be struck between the need to be specific and clear whilst, at
the same time, avoiding including too much detail. This is to avoid creating discrepancies as to the meaning or unnecessary
arguments on both sides that might ultimately require a tribunal to resolve. If a dispute over meaning arises, the arbitration
process allows (and in fact encourages) the parties to resolve the issue and also agree on specifics.
However, once parties are in a dispute, it should not be forgotten that it will be more challenging for them to agree matters,
particularly where issues of arbitral process and procedure may be perceived as giving one party or the other some tactical
advantage.
If agreement cannot be reached, the tribunal may be asked to rule on the scope of the arbitration agreement, the interpretation of
the clause, and their jurisdiction or powers in relation to the arbitration. One of the features of arbitration is a doctrine referred
to as kompetenz-kompetenz, under which the arbitral tribunal has the capacity to decide on its own jurisdiction.
Examples of effective clauses
6-006
Standard or model arbitration clauses are provided by various arbitral institutions and the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), which can be found on their websites. 12  The full wording of a selection of institutional
standard clauses is provided in Appendix Four. Standard arbitration clauses can be used as a starting point to draft an arbitration
clause in a contract. If the arbitration is being administered by a specific institution, the benefit of using the same institution’s
standard clause is that it is already tailored to the particular arbitration rules of that institution.
The precise wording of arbitration clauses may vary from institution to institution with some being more expansive that others.
Drafters can pick and choose their preferred wording to suit their circumstances, but it is important to ensure that all the main
elements of the arbitration clause are covered.
Recording the parties’ choice of arbitration
6-007
One of the first requirements when providing for arbitration in a dispute resolution or jurisdiction clause in a contract is to
consider its scope and whether drafters want it to apply to all disputes or only to certain disputes between the parties.
It is common for the arbitration clause to apply to all disputes between the parties, including contractual and non-contractual
claims, and in tort and the general practice is to define the scope broadly so as to capture all disputes related to the contract
in question.
What disputes are covered?
6-008
For a more general arbitration clause the following are the phrases to be included:
“Any [dispute], [controversy], [difference] or [claim]”.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
Various standard arbitration clauses use a combination of these words to include a broad scope of issues to be submitted to
arbitration. Although a “dispute” would be a more specific description of what the parties are to submit to arbitration, in order to
encompass all the issues between the parties, a combination of all the above should be sufficient to cover them in a broader sense.
“Arising out of or in connection with [ or relating to] the contract”.
This wording is used to limit the issues to the ones that are related to the contract in question. It appears broad enough to cover
a variety of issues related to the contract including non-contractual matters. However, this issue may attract various arguments
as to what non-contractual disputes are legally related to the contract. One of the key issues is whether the clause is considered
to be “wide” or “narrow”. Judgments have highlighted that interpretation can be heavily dependent of the facts and/or the views
of the tribunal/courts with particular attention to the remoteness of the issue in dispute. 13
In order to avoid unnecessary discussions as to the question of jurisdiction of the constituted tribunal, it would be better to be
more specific as to whether non-contractual obligations would be covered by adding “any dispute regarding non-contractual
obligations arising out of or relating to it” (like the standard clause provided by HKIAC) (see Appendix Four).
Specifying the scope
6-009
“Or the breach, termination or validity thereof” (Chartered Institute of Arbitrators (CIArb)) or “including
any question regarding its existence, validity or termination” (Singapore International Arbitration Centre
(SIAC); London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA)) or “or the breach, termination or invalidity
thereof” (Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (SCC)) or “the existence, validity, interpretation, performance,
breach or termination thereof” (HKIAC) or “arising out of the formation, performance, interpretation,
nullification, termination or invalidation of this contract or arising therefrom or related thereto in any manner
whatsoever” (Dubai International Arbitration Centre (DIAC)).
Some of the arbitration institutions suggest additional detail (highlighted above) in the wording of their standard arbitration
clauses. They suggest either “or” or “including” and state more precisely what the issues could be concerned about.
Whilst it may not be strictly necessary to include that, and indeed some of the arbitration institutions do not include any further
clarification (e.g. ICC), it is still possible to cover potential arguments regarding the validity of the contract and include similar
wording. This is to avoid any disputes between the parties as to whether the arbitration clause survives if the contract is invalid
or did not exist at all. Although the principle of separability of the arbitration agreement should be the response for many
arguments, in order to avoid further discussions, making clear from the start what the arbitration clause covers, could save more
costs in the future.
If that is done, it would be better to state “including” and list possible issues that could be involved, as using “or” suggests that
the previous phrase regarding disputes/differences “arising out of or related to the contract” may not cover breach, termination,
etc. The word “including” would provide examples of those related issues, which are intended by the parties to be covered.
Submission to arbitration
6-010

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
“Shall be submitted to” […] “and settled by final and binding arbitration” or “finally resolved by arbitration” or
“shall be referred to and finally resolved by”.
This wording aims to clarify that the dispute should be submitted to arbitration and that it will be final and binding. It can also
indicate the institution which will administer the arbitration (see para.6-011).
The inclusion of “final and binding” deals with any arguments advanced to suggest that the award may be optional, and that
the ultimate binding decision has to be made by court. Although it is by no means a normal process and arbitration itself is
normally final and binding (although there is a possibility to challenge an arbitration award in national courts on very specific
grounds), it cannot be assumed that in every jurisdiction this would be the case. “Final and binding” would address this risk.
Specify institution and/or rules
6-011
If the parties intend to submit their disputes to a specified institution to be determined according to their rules, or to have the
dispute administered by the institution applying ad hoc/UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, then this intent should be specified in
the arbitration agreement.
“In accordance with” or “settled under […] Arbitration Rules” (“in force when the Notice of Arbitration is
submitted”).
This wording indicates that certain rules will apply to the arbitration. This principle of the arbitration being carried out in the
way intended (and agreed) by the parties is fundamental to an effective arbitration. As such, even after a dispute has arisen, if
the parties mutually agree, e.g. to vary the number of arbitrators in the tribunal, then, provided this agreement is recorded (and
not disputed), the institution (and arbitrators) must abide by what the parties have agreed, unless it is against the law of the seat.
Even if the rules of that institution are later specified, providing a reference to the institution in an agreement, prevents further
arguments that the arbitration was meant to be ad hoc but under the rules of a particular institution.
It is technically possible to “mix and match” institutional rules for ad hoc and non-institutional rules for some institutions, 14
but this can create further complications and require very careful drafting. The drafters would have to check with the institution
whether they would allow administration under rules other than their own and how they will fit into the processes that institution
has when administrating arbitrations. It is also possible to have a situation where an arbitration is administered by an institution
but is conducted under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, rather than the rules of that institution. Such a possibility is provided
for in the standard clauses of AAA, HKIAC, SIAC, etc. (see Appendix Four).
Whilst various institutional rules tend to cover similar provisions on the basis of similar principles, there are various important
differences among them, in particular in relation to procedures such as appointment mechanisms. These include, for example,
the LCIA rules do not allow the parties to appoint arbitrators, only to nominate them, subject to confirmation by the LCIA
court; default provisions if the agreement does not specify the number of arbitrators; multi-party, multi-contract provisions;
confidentiality provisions; availability of expedited procedure; emergency arbitrators; availability of electronic submissions
and remote hearings; time limit for making an award; possibility of scrutiny of the award; and perhaps most importantly, the
costs involved, etc.
If the parties are unsure of which rules to choose, the easiest option can be to go for tried and tested institutional rules.
Drafters should bear in mind that the latest version of the arbitration rules will normally apply to a dispute in question. If parties
prefer for any other version of the arbitration rules to apply, they need to specify the same in the arbitration clause.
The wording “in force when the Notice of Arbitration is submitted” makes it unambiguous that the most recent rules apply,
rather than the ones that were in force at the time of the conclusion of the contract. In order to eliminate further arguments, this
phrase could also be included (as it is done in standard clauses of HKIAC and SIAC).

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
Narrowing the scope
6-012
Before settling on the general all-encompassing arbitration clause, drafters should consider the circumstances that exist between
the parties and, given the nature of their business or collaboration, whether other unintended disputes could fall into the scope
of the arbitration clause and whether they want those disputes to be resolved in arbitration. If the parties do not want them to
be arbitrated, the arbitration clause should be drafted in a narrower way to exclude those claims and/or to expressly provide
another method of resolving those disputes, for example, by litigation.
If a narrower scope is desired, careful consideration should be given to the drafting, as there is a potential risk of arguments as to
the scope of the arbitration clause itself, which in turn, could lead to a dispute as to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, parallel
dispute resolution processes and inconsistent decisions, and/or result ultimately in a challenge to the award or the enforcement
of the award in national courts.
Expedited rules
6-013
Some parties may seek to introduce a “threshold value” that the dispute has to cross before the clause applies. This should not
be encouraged, as it gives rise to difficulties in defining or quantifying such a threshold as well as the logical assumption that
a party would not trigger the use of the procedure for a minor claim. This then raises the potential issue of what happens to a
“minor” claim and creates the possibility of a potential scenario where a party goes to court for a small claim, but the defendant
refers to the dispute resolution clause covering all disputes and the court agrees that it has no jurisdiction.
To try and address this, a number of institutions have developed what are referred to as “expedited rules” to cover smaller
claims. The UNCITRAL Expedited Rules 15  require express consent by both parties and clearly cover a situation where there
is mutual agreement that the specific dispute should be covered by an expedited process that should be quicker and cheaper.
This “opt-in” approach is mirrored in a number of other institutions. 16
In contrast, the ICC and ICDR Rules automatically apply expedited procedures for disputes falling under a certain amount,
unless the parties have opted out. 17  Article VI.2(b) of the ICC Expedited Rules sets the threshold at US$3 million. The ICDR
Rules set a lower threshold (US$500,000) and, within their expedited rules, provide for claims of less than US$100,000 being
decided on documents only.
This highlights the need for parties to consider whether they wish to incorporate such a threshold into their own arbitration
agreement that would allow for bifurcation of claims such that any small claims are dealt with either by expedited institutional
rules or by litigation.
Choice of the number and selection of arbitrators
6-014
Another important choice is the selection of the tribunal itself and the number of arbitrators. The parties normally choose either
one or three arbitrators. It is possible to choose an even number of arbitrators, but this would require an umpire to be appointed.
The parties can also pre-agree the procedure for the selection of arbitrators in advance.
In order to give the parties equal influence over the choice of arbitrator, it is common for each party to appoint an arbitrator
and for the appointed arbitrators to select the third arbitrator as the chair. As an alternative, they can also leave the selection of
arbitrators to an institution or another appointing authority, especially if they cannot agree.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
The fact that those choices are open for the parties helps make arbitration more flexible than litigation where, depending on the
rules of a particular jurisdiction, it is unlikely that the number and choice of the judges would be open for the parties to choose.
The number of arbitrators in the tribunal
6-015
“The number of arbitrators shall be […]”/“the arbitral tribunal shall be composed of three arbitrators/a sole
arbitrator”.
It is important to specify the number of arbitrators in the arbitration clause in order to avoid any further disputes in this regard.
Different considerations apply as to what number of arbitrators should be chosen. From one side, a single arbitrator tribunal
will be cheaper and, perhaps, more efficient in terms of agreeing on schedules and procedural orders. In addition, it is likely
that the award would be rendered quicker, as there is less room for disagreement, unlike when a three-person tribunal is chosen.
At the same time, many of these factors will depend on the personality of a chosen arbitrator and their way of working and
managing the proceedings.
In theory, a three-member tribunal would ensure a more balanced approach to the issues involved and leave less room for
subjectivity and personal preferences. However, this could lead to more expensive proceedings (the arbitrators fees would triple),
as well as potential delays. These issues can arise if members of the tribunal disagree on various points or if they work under
different timetables or time zones or if their personal preferences and approaches affect the smooth running of the proceedings.
Another consideration is the quantum of the dispute, as the costs of a three-member tribunal, institution fees (if used) and
lawyers’ fees could exceed what can be reasonably recovered. Unfortunately, it is often not possible to predict the quantum of
potential disputes at the time of drafting. However, drafters may consider including provisions for using a simplified/expedited
procedure, together with the number of arbitrators appointed depending on a certain variable, for example the potential quantum
of the dispute. This has potential benefits if the chosen arbitration rules do not provide for the same by virtue of their application.
Mechanism of appointment of arbitrators
6-016
Another very important point to consider is the mechanism of appointment of one or three member tribunals. This should be
provided for in the arbitration clause. If this is done later, it could be difficult to agree on it and this could delay the process.
One needs to bear in mind that an appointment mechanism may be already specified in the arbitration rules chosen. 18  Drafters
should check the specified rules to avoid any contradiction, especially if the proposed mechanism is very specific.
Sole arbitrators are commonly appointed by parties exchanging lists of proposed candidates to see if there is common ground,
or for one party to produce a list that the other party can select from.
Three-member tribunals are typically appointed by each party appointing their own arbitrator, and the two party-appointed
arbitrators then appoint a chairperson or president (often in consultation with the parties).
The more complicated or controversial the mechanism for appointing arbitrators, the more arguments can arise as to following
the correct procedure. In turn, this could also further delay the proceedings.
It is important to provide for a default mechanism, for example, for the appointment by a third party, in case the parties do not
agree on the appointment or fail to respond. The easiest way is to delegate the appointment to an appointing authority, being an
institution or a court, which can ensure the independence and fairness of the selection/appointment process.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
Some arbitration institutions are willing to act as appointing authorities, even if they do not administer the arbitration. This
default mechanism would provide a better option for the parties, if they cannot agree, rather than requesting a national court
to act as an appointing authority, which may be a costly and lengthy process and highly dependent on the jurisdiction of the
national court in question and its procedural rules and powers.
An example of the procedure for appointing a sole arbitrator by the parties with the institution being an appointing authority
in the event of disagreement is provided by the CIArb:
“A sole arbitrator shall be appointed by agreement of the parties. If the parties have not agreed on the
appointment of a sole arbitrator within 30 days of the respondent’s receipt of a notice of arbitration, then, at
the request of one of the parties, a sole arbitrator shall be appointed by the CIArb.”
If a three-member tribunal is to be selected, the ICC provides for an example of the procedure for appointing the third member
of the tribunal:
“The third arbitrator, who shall act as president of the arbitral tribunal, shall be jointly nominated by [the
other two arbitrators/the parties] within [30] days of the [confirmation/appointment] of the second arbitrator.
If the president of the arbitral tribunal is not nominated within this time period, the Court shall appoint such
arbitrator.” 19
The CIArb also provides for various options of appointing a three-member tribunal varying from dedicating this role exclusively
to CIArb as appointing authority for all three arbitrators being selected, to CIArb becoming an appointing authority for all three
only in case the parties fail to agree or appoint arbitrators. It also provides an example of a more complicated procedure, in case
of the failure to appoint an arbitrator either by one of the parties, or by the selected arbitrators to appoint the third one:
“Each party shall be entitled to appoint an arbitrator and the two party-appointed arbitrators shall then appoint
a third arbitrator. If either party fails to appoint an arbitrator within 30 days of receiving notice of the
appointment of an arbitrator by the other party, the CIArb shall, at the request of either party, appoint an
arbitrator on behalf of the defaulting party. If the first and second arbitrator appointed fail to agree upon a
third arbitrator within 30 days of the appointment of the second arbitrator, the third arbitrator shall, at the
request of either party, be appointed by the CIArb.”
It is important to understand that the appointment mechanism, particularly in complex multi-party arbitrations, may have an
impact on the validity and/or enforcement of any award. For example, the French courts have held that an institution requiring
multiple respondents to jointly appoint a single arbitrator was contrary to the public policy principle of equality between the
parties. 20
Which arbitrators to appoint?
6-017
The pool of available arbitrators could be reduced, if the parties decide to specify the qualifications of arbitrations in an
arbitration clause. It is not necessarily required to limit the pool of potential candidates by specifying their qualifications, but it
might be considered in cases where more technical knowledge and expertise could help to resolve potential disputes.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
At the same time, qualifications requirements that are too restrictive may limit the pool of candidates to the point of making it
virtually impossible to appoint an arbitrator or arbitrators for a particular arbitration due to their unavailability or inability to
fulfil all the requirements. This could lead to delays and potential abuse by a party who wants to disrupt the process by insisting
on strict compliance with the requirements. Drafters need to be careful not to restrict the pool of potential candidates too much,
especially if other requirements, such as nationality or language of proceedings, are also imposed either by the arbitration clause
itself or by the applicable arbitration rules.
Drafters should ensure that any qualifications of arbitrators that are determined to be essential, should be expressed in objectively
determinable language. For example, the agreement should not require that arbitrators should have “extensive experience in
English law” but rather provide that arbitrators should be “English-qualified lawyers with a minimum of [10] years’ post-
qualification experience”. Any ambiguity in the requirements is likely to lead to further arguments.
Nationality requirements could also impact on the exclusion of arbitrator candidates, who speak the language of the arbitration
and/or who are familiar with the substantive law of the contract and/or procedural law applicable to arbitration proceedings. It
might be a great advantage to have an arbitral tribunal who understand and can read the law they are going to decide upon in
its original language and conduct the proceedings in the language of arbitration, without constantly relying on the translations/
interpretation. This is because a lot of understanding can be lost in translation, especially when the nuances of wording of the
applicable law are in issue. Although not strictly required, it might make a material difference in the way how arguments and
disputes are perceived by each member of the arbitral tribunal.
Therefore, it can be advantageous for the efficiency and fairness of the dispute resolution, if the arbitrator(s) are familiar with
the core language of the dispute and the legal tradition in which the dispute belongs. However, this can be difficult to achieve,
especially if nationality requirements are imposed. To reduce or eliminate the perception of potential bias, the nationality
requirements are often used to restrict the arbitrators to ones who do not share their nationality with any of the parties to the
arbitration agreement.
These nationality restrictions are common in institutional rules, especially for sole arbitrators and chairpersons. 21  This is
because it is often perceived that this would help to eliminate any bias towards a party sharing the same nationality as a sole/
presiding arbitrator. This perception may vary from arbitration to arbitration and jurisdiction to jurisdiction, where it may already
be accepted or assumed that arbitrators have to be independent and impartial irrespective of shared characteristics with the
parties.
Choosing and specifying applicable laws
Introduction
6-018
There are three potential choices of law parties can make: substantive governing law of the contract, law of the arbitration
agreement and procedural law/lex arbitri/law of the seat. These choices are discussed briefly in paras 6-019–6-021.
Drafters considering including an arbitration clause in a contract, should firstly choose which laws they are going to apply
to the contract, the arbitration agreement, and to the procedure (namely, which seat they are going to choose). This is an
important preliminary consideration, as it determines what form the arbitration clause would need to take, as well as what
formal requirements need to be satisfied for the arbitration clause/agreement to be considered valid, effective and enforceable
under the national laws they have chosen.
Governing/substantive law
6-019

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
“This contract shall be governed by the substantive law of […]”.
A key choice that the parties must make when drafting the contract is the substantive or governing law of the contract. This
choice is not specifically related to the dispute resolution clause but is normally found in the “law and jurisdiction” clause
or governing law clause in the contract. This choice is of the law that will apply to the substance of the dispute between the
parties if the dispute arises out of the contractual provisions.
It is important to understand that there may be other laws applicable to the dispute between the parties. If, for example,
the arbitration clause is broad enough to include other disputes arising out of the contract or related to the contract, it is
possible there may be other contractual or tort related claims that are brought under the same arbitration clause. In this case,
the arbitral tribunal considering the matter may be required to consider the law applicable to the issues involved in those
other contractual or tortious relationships between the parties and decide on the application of substantive law separately in
relation to each of them.
However, if those relationships are governed by other laws, it may cause some confusion or potential arguments and further
escalation of the dispute between the parties. It is wise to consider if there are any related contracts to the contract under
consideration (for the purposes of including governing law) and whether they can all be governed by one system of law.
This could help to avoid further complications if disputes are ultimately considered in arbitration. This and other
considerations will be discussed in more detail in Chapter Seven in the section on governing law clauses.
Law of the arbitration agreement
6-020
“The arbitration agreement shall be governed by […]”.
An arbitration agreement is, under most legal systems, considered to be a separate agreement from the contract it is contained
in. As such, it will have its own governing law. This may be the same as the governing law of the host contract or it may be
another law. It is important to consider this, and to make express provision for what law is to govern the arbitration agreement
because, where this is not stated, different jurisdictions apply different tests to determine the law of the arbitration agreement.
This can lead to uncertainty and, in some cases, undesired outcomes.
The debate is primarily focused on the principle of separability of the arbitration agreement from the contract itself, usually
for the purposes of its validity. This is to ensure that the arbitration agreement remains valid and effective, even where the
validity of the “host” or “matrix” contract, which contains the arbitration agreement, is impugned.
Under the principle of separability, when parties conclude a contract containing an arbitration clause, they are in effect treated
as concluding two agreements. In practice, this means the arbitration clause will usually survive an (alleged) invalidity of the
matrix contract. As a result, any disputes arising out of or in relation to that agreement can still be resolved through parties’
chosen dispute resolution mechanism: arbitration. In these circumstances, the arbitration agreement would still provide the
arbitral tribunal with the jurisdiction to decide on the validity of the contract. Even if the tribunal ultimately considers the
contract to be invalid, it can still issue an award in this regard and a decision regarding the invalidity of the contract will
not invalidate the award.
Given this principle of separability, the question remains as to whether the arbitration clause or agreement (being in essence a
separate agreement) would be necessarily governed by the same law as the matrix contract. It is especially so if the arbitration
clause contains a seat of arbitration with applicable procedural law being different from the law governing the matrix contract.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
In the absence of a specific provision in the arbitration clause containing governing law of the arbitration agreement, the
question is whether it is the governing law of the matrix contract, or the law of the seat, that governs the arbitration agreement.
This question has not received a consistent answer across different jurisdictions and the controversy still remains. 22
This controversy developed further in the English courts, where the question of which law, the law of the seat or the governing
law, applies to the arbitration agreement, was discussed. In a slightly convoluted way, the English Supreme Court by majority
decided with respect to English law that the law that is applicable to the arbitration agreement will be that chosen, either
expressly or impliedly, by the parties to govern it. If no such choice is made, but the parties have chosen a governing law for
the substantive contract, then, unless there is a good reason to conclude otherwise, this law will generally be implied to govern
the arbitration agreement, which forms part of the contract. If there is no choice of governing law at all, then the arbitration
agreement will be governed by the law, which it is most closely connected to, which will usually be the law of the seat. 23
Given the controversy around this topic, the Law Commission carried out a second consultation on reform of the Arbitration
Act 1996. 24  In its final report, the Law Commission went further with their proposal to change the law, so that the law of
the arbitration agreement is the law of the seat unless the parties expressly agreed otherwise in the arbitration agreement. 25
It considered that the law in Enka v Chubb is complex and unpredictable and creates a risk of satellite arguments, which in
turn could lead to unnecessary cost and delay. 26
The new proposal was included in the new s.6A to be added to the Arbitration Act 1996 through the Arbitration Bill introduced
to Parliament in November 2023. This reached its second reading in the House of Lords on 31 July 2024 and is likely to
become law in 2024. This section provides that the law of the arbitration agreement is either the law that the parties expressly
agree applies to the arbitration agreement or, in the absence of such agreement, the law of the seat of the arbitration in question.
A default rule in favour of the law of the seat was considered to bring simplicity and certainty to this controversial issue. 27
Irrespective of the position that English law adopts, it is important to consider that the question as to the applicable law to
the arbitration agreement may be resolved differently by courts of other jurisdictions, especially at the enforcement stage.
This could create additional issues for future litigation and potential difficulties in enforcing the award around the world.
Moreover, the nature of international arbitration is such that an arbitral tribunal, potentially consisting of arbitrators coming
from different legal traditions, may decide this question in a different way. This could, again, create more inconsistency,
uncertainty and controversy around the topic.
It is therefore important at the drafting stage to be as explicit as possible as to which law applies where and precisely specify
the law of the arbitration agreement, even if it requires a single additional line of drafting, as this may avoid significant
disputes down the line.
It is also worth the parties actively considering whether there is a possibility of choosing the law of the matrix contract to be
the same as the law of the seat of arbitration. This could avoid unnecessary arguments and uncertainty around the applicable
law and also would allow the parties to choose arbitrators who are familiar with the law (both of the underlying contract and
the law of the seat), which could lead to more predictability of the award issued.
The law of the arbitration agreement can be provided either in the arbitration clause itself or in the substantive law clause of
the underlying contract referring explicitly to the arbitration clause, that it is also governed by it.
A few institutions, like CIArb, also provide wording specifying the law of arbitration agreement. As discussed above, in
order to avoid further arguments as to whether it should be the law of the seat or the substantive law of the contract, it is
recommended to specify this in the arbitration clause, in addition to the seat and the substantive law of the contract.
There may be other requirements in national laws of other jurisdictions that need to be satisfied for the arbitration agreement
to be recognised. As such, this needs to be checked before the decision is made as to which law/seat to include.
Procedural law/lex arbitri
6-021

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
The other choice of law that the parties need to make when drafting an arbitration clause is what procedural law (or sometime
called curial law or lex arbitri) will be applied when an arbitral tribunal considers the dispute. This choice of law determines
the national courts of the jurisdiction that will have supervisory and supporting powers over the arbitration process. Following
an award, this is usually where challenges to the award take place (not necessarily where the enforcement of the award
happens). National courts’ supporting powers include issuing interim measures, such as injunctions, preservation of evidence,
property, assets, as well as securing attendance of witnesses and taking evidence of witnesses. Supervisory national court
functions include such issues as composition of the tribunal, questions of jurisdiction and challenges to arbitral awards.
The procedural law normally contains fundamental rules that will apply to arbitrations seated within that jurisdiction (e.g.
equal treatment of parties, procedure for commencement of arbitral proceedings, statements of case, hearings, experts,
evidence, awards, etc.), national court powers in support of arbitration proceedings, and their supervisory function over
arbitral proceedings. Some will be mandatory rules, which apply to all arbitrations seated in that jurisdiction, while others
may be default or fallback rules that can be modified or ousted by party agreement (including through the parties’ choice and
incorporation of institutional or ad hoc arbitration rules). Typically, it will have fallback procedures for the key issues where
the parties have failed to agree these, e.g. for the appointment of the tribunal.
Other issues will then be left for the tribunal to determine once it is constituted. The specifics would normally be reserved
for the arbitration rules and their application by the arbitral tribunals, who would also decide on procedural matters issuing
procedural orders (although procedural law could set minimum procedural standards for the arbitration proceedings).
Providing for a seat
6-022
Procedural or curial law is the law of the seat of arbitration. 28  The “seat” is the place where the arbitration is presumed to
happen for the purposes of the determination of the applicable laws to it and determines the “nationality” of the award for
enforcement purposes.
“The seat of arbitration shall be […]”.
With respect to whether to say “seat” or “place” of arbitration, different institutions provide for different wording. The problem
with using the word “place” is that, whilst it was traditionally used to describe the “seat” of arbitration, it could be interpreted
both as a “seat” and as a “venue”, which could be different from the seat. In order to avoid further confusion, it is preferable
to indicate “seat”. If is necessary to choose “venue” at the time of drafting, which is different from the seat, the word “venue”
could be used to contrast it from the “seat”. However, contract drafters should bear in mind that choosing the venue at the time
of drafting could be too prescriptive or restrictive, as it is impossible to predict the impact of future geopolitical and world
events in or around a chosen location.
Choosing a seat does not mean, however, that the arbitrations should be physically conducted at its “seat”. If parties prefer that
the arbitration is conducted in another place, they can dedicate or specify a “venue” for arbitration to take place. Alternatively,
the venue could be agreed by parties when/if a dispute arises depending on the convenience for both parties and the tribunal
to conduct the arbitration.
There is also a possibility to conduct a hearing remotely, online or in a hybrid format, but still have the seat formally in the
specific jurisdiction of which laws the parties want to apply for procedural issues involved in the case. This was widely done
during the COVID-19 pandemic and remains a very convenient format to be used, when it is more efficient to do that. This
is further discussed in Chapter Nine.
The possibility of conducting hearings remotely is now reflected in many arbitral rules. 29  Such a provision can also be included
in the arbitration agreement. If this is not specified in the institutional arbitration rules, it may be better to provide for such a
possibility in the arbitration clause itself. This is in order to avoid further arguments, as to whether the arbitration rules and the
law of the seat allow hearings to happen remotely and whether this breaches any rights of the parties.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
A provision for remote hearings will reduce the opportunity to escalate the dispute further on procedural grounds and provide a
convenient and cost-effective way to conduct arbitration. This could be especially important if it becomes impractical to travel
to a particular venue for some or all of the participants in the arbitration process.
Many jurisdictions have adopted the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration (UNCITRAL Model
Law), 30  which contains rules for the states to adopt in their entirety or with some changes. However, not every jurisdiction has
adopted the UNCITRAL Model Law, 31  and this may impact how arbitration proceedings are conducted. In order to make sure
that contracting parties understand the procedural requirements, it is advisable before choosing the seat of arbitration to check
whether the seat has fully adopted the UNCITRAL Model Law or with any changes.
If the UNCITRAL Model Law has not been adopted, it is important to know what laws are in place in that jurisdiction and how
they regulate the procedure for arbitration and what role the national courts have in relation to support and intervention into
the arbitral proceedings. To avoid any challenges, drafters of the arbitration agreement need to make sure that they have a full
appreciation of the consequences of choosing a seat and the implications of any non-standard arbitration laws that may apply
there. It follows that, the selection of a less widely used seat may inadvertently reduce the pool of arbitrators if the parties are
seeking an arbitrator with knowledge of the law of that seat, as well as the nature of the dispute in question.
Moreover, whether or not the UNCITRAL Model Law has been adopted, drafters should also assess the attitude and experience
of the local supervisory courts. Some points to consider include whether local courts have sufficient experience in dealing with
significant commercial matters, whether there is any notable unpredictability in the way they conduct and rule on the matters,
the length of time it may take to appeal an unfavourable court decision, as well as the risk of state interference in disputes that
have a state angle (e.g. especially if the counterparty is a state-owned entity).
Given the supervisory and supporting role that the local courts may be asked to exercise in relation to a particular dispute, these
factors could substantially impact on the effectiveness of the arbitration process and its outcome. If the matter gets delayed
in the local courts exercising these powers, the arbitration proceedings could be delayed or end up in vain even if they are
otherwise conducted efficiently. This concern is compounded if interim measures are not granted/delayed or the challenges
become subject to unnecessarily delay, bias or influence of the third parties in domestic courts.
One example of the need to carefully consider the selected law is the application of s.69 of the UK Arbitration Act 1996, which
allows parties to appeal to the court on a question of law arising out of an award made in the proceedings. Section 69(1) of the
Arbitration Act 1996 allows parties to opt out and exclude its application but this must be expressly agreed.
The reverse also applies, e.g. if the LCIA Rules are chosen (which exclude such appeals), then the parties could opt to incorporate
s.69.
There are some default rules envisaged in the applicable arbitration rules which provide for determination of the seat of
arbitration in the absence of a specific reference to it in the arbitration agreement (see, for example, LCIA Rules 2020 art.16.2;
ICC Rules 2021 art.18; UNCITRAL Rules 2013 art.18). In order to avoid further costs, complications and arguments, it is very
important for drafters to specify the seat of arbitration from the start in the arbitration clause.
Finality
6-023
Another important consideration relevant to the choice of seat is the possibility of a losing party challenging an award. In court
litigation, appeals of court judgments in various jurisdictions can take a very long time and this can substantially obstruct the
recovery of the sums awarded. In arbitration, the finality of arbitration awards is typically greater than that of court judgments.
This is because there are usually very limited grounds for a challenge to an arbitration award. Examples of challenges can be
seen in art.34 of the UNCITRAL Model law (see also in relation to English law—ss.67 and 68 of the Arbitration Act 1996).
The rights to challenge an arbitration award are determined by the law of the seat, as it is only the courts of the seat of arbitration
that have jurisdiction to hear and determine challenges to an award. However, the grounds for challenge are much narrower
than standard rights of appeal against court judgments and are typically directed at the integrity of the arbitral process, rather
than the merits of any decision. The exception to this is challenges that go to the jurisdiction of the tribunal, which are typically

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
more substantive challenges. As a result, this makes it more difficult for a losing party to engage in protracted and lengthy
proceedings, which in turn brings a greater finality to the proceedings.
In addition to any express provisions of the parties’ arbitration agreement, most institutional arbitration rules provide that the
parties undertake to comply with any arbitral award rendered and waive all rights of recourse against it, to the extent permissible
by law (see, for example, art.26.8 of the LCIA Rules 2020). This is sufficient to disapply s.69.
The Law Commission also considered suggestions for either repealing s.69 or amending it to allow more appeals. However,
it did not make recommendations for any amendments to s.69 in its final report. Instead, it considered that s.69 in its current
form strikes a “defensible compromise between promoting the finality of arbitral awards (by limiting appeals) and correcting
blatant errors of law”. 32
Specifying language
6-024
“The language to be used in the arbitral proceedings shall be […]”.
Drafters should consider choosing and including the language of the proceedings in the arbitration clause. This is to avoid further
dispute in this regard. The tribunal can determine the language of arbitration, but in order to avoid further costs on arguing this
point and to help parties to choose arbitrators and counsel for particular proceedings, it is best to know in advance what the
language of the arbitration is going to be. If a less common language is used to suit the natural language of the parties, some
thought needs to be given to the question of whether this could potentially reduce the pool of available arbitrators and/or raise
the question of the cost of translation.
When choosing the language of the arbitration proceedings, parties should consider the language of the documents being used,
the language of the contract, substantive law of the contract, and the seat and the language of the parties. It may be sensible for
the arbitration to be conducted in the language of the contract.
If the parties choose a language for the proceedings that is different to the language of the contract, they need to be aware of
potential complications arising from translation issues and/or critical issues being lost in translation. If the most convenient
language for the proceedings has not been chosen from the start, the parties may incur substantial costs of translation and
interpretation. However, it is also understandable that these costs may not be the most important consideration when taking
into account all other factors.
Drafters should also think about a potential pool of arbitrators and (if applicable) counsel available. This is particularly important
if the language of arbitration is not one of the most common languages used and also if the language is from a jurisdiction
where there are not many suitable arbitrators or lawyers for arbitration proceedings or a technical matter requiring a specialist
expertise. Whilst arbitrators and counsel could work with translation/interpretation, if it is believed that the pool of available
arbitrators due to nationality or specialisation requirements will be very limited, it is likely to be better to choose the language
in such a way that it broadens the availability of arbitrator candidates in case of future arbitrations and reduces reliance on the
translation/interpretation in the proceedings.
Judgment on an award
6-025
“Judgment on any award issued under this provision may be entered by any court of competent
jurisdiction”/“any court having jurisdiction thereof”.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
This provision may not be necessary but is provided by AAA and CIArb standard clauses. Essentially, what it means is that
an award issued under the arbitration clause could be transformed into a judgment as part of the enforcement process and, by
that, benefit from local enforcement procedures. However, courts of the relevant jurisdiction would still have to follow their
processes as to the enforcement of the arbitral awards. Given that this provision does not contain mandatory wording (namely
it uses “may be”) and the fact that, irrespective of this wording being included, it does not add anything to the clause. However,
in order to deal with an eventuality where a particular jurisdiction may require this wording to be included in the arbitration
clause, there is no problem in including this wording in the arbitration clause.
Confidentiality and privacy
6-026
Another important benefit of arbitration is that parties are able to agree on the confidentiality of proceedings. Unlike litigation,
which, in the vast majority of the cases, will entail proceedings conducted in public, arbitrations are often both private (in the
sense that hearings are conducted behind closed doors) and confidential with the awards themselves not being published.
In many jurisdictions confidentiality of arbitration proceedings is the default position under the relevant laws. This is typically
subject to some standard exceptions, namely disclosure required by law; in the interests of justice to protect a party’s interest in
other proceedings; where the party originally produced the material consented; etc. However, there has been increasing debate
about the need for transparency of arbitral awards and decision making in order to increase public confidence in the arbitral
process 33  and to reduce the negative impact of “closed door” decisions on the development of commercial law. 34
In English law, for example, privacy and confidentiality of the proceedings is preserved in common law. This means that
the arbitration hearings are private and cannot be attended by third parties without the mutual consent of the parties to the
proceedings. The confidentiality rule applies not just to the hearing but also to the documents generated or produced during
the arbitration proceedings, including to the award. 35  Confidentiality is also provided for in the arbitration rules of some
institutions. 36  However, in contrast, it should be noted that some institutions, including the ICC 37  and HKIAC, 38  have an
express default policy of publishing awards and advise parties that the awards will be published if their rules are adopted and
no objection to publication is made or express confidentiality clause is included in the arbitration agreement.
This issue of confidentiality was reviewed by the Law Commission in their 2022 consultation review of the Arbitration
Act 1996. 39  One preliminary conclusion was that not all types of arbitration should be confidential by default. 40  The Law
Commission considered that, although the UK Supreme Court has confirmed there is normally an implied term of confidentiality
of arbitral proceedings in the agreement, in some areas, such as investor claims against states, the default term is transparency
rather than confidentiality.
The Law Commission acknowledged the increasing practice of publishing arbitral awards and noted that, where parties expressly
agree to confidentiality or transparency, the law gives that weight and takes the agreement as the starting point. As a result,
in its final report, the Commission did not suggest any amendments in this area to the Arbitration Act 1996. This decision
took account of the divergence of approaches in this area, the different approaches of arbitration rules and the ability to agree
confidentiality. 41
Parties need to be aware that confidentiality obligations may not be imposed by the laws of every jurisdiction or the rules
of every arbitration institution. Furthermore, the scope of the confidentiality obligation may vary. As such, parties need to
be careful about assuming that arbitrations are always confidential by default. If confidentiality is important, the parties
should check with lawyers of the respective jurisdictions, whether this is definitely the case. At any event, in order to avoid
unnecessary ambiguity and further arguments during arbitration proceedings, the parties should consider expressly providing in
their arbitration agreement for privacy and confidentiality of arbitration proceedings and any documents generated or disclosed.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
18
Some arbitration rules deal with confidentiality but not all of them to the same extent. 42  If confidentiality is important for the
parties, in order not to rely on the law of a particular jurisdiction or on the arbitration rules to preserve confidentiality, it is better
to include a confidentiality clause in the agreement.
The scope of such a confidentiality clause should be as wide as possible and not just apply to the award itself but to all the
documents prepared for, submitted or disclosed in the proceedings. This would then be part of the contract between the parties
and could be ruled upon if a party is perceived to have breached it.
As it is a contractual term, if there is a breach of the confidentiality clause, the normal potential remedies could apply, including
seeking an injunction or pursuing damages. As with a normal civil breach, the challenge would be to prove causation and
damage but, in the circumstances, depending on the nature of the breach, there may also be the potential to seek remedies within
the arbitration process itself. The process and outcome would be fact specific but the threat of such a remedy should serve to
remind parties not to take the duty of confidentiality lightly.
By way of example, the ICC model clause mentions a potential additional provision to the arbitration agreement, which is
designed to allow the parties to explicitly protect the confidentiality of the proceedings:
“The parties agree to keep confidential the existence of the arbitration, the arbitral proceedings, the
submissions made by the parties and the decisions made by the arbitral tribunal, including its awards, except
as required by applicable law and to the extent not already in the public domain.”
At the same time, there are circumstances where applicable laws may require lifting of confidentiality. This could happen in
case of challenges in national courts of the jurisdiction of the tribunal or of the award. In this case, this provision may not protect
them fully. This is another important example of the need to check with local lawyers of the laws applied to arbitration before
deciding on a selection of particular laws and be aware of any potential issues, if later a dispute arises between the parties.
Other clauses to consider
6-027
There may be other procedures or remedies that drafters may decide to consider which could make arbitration process more
robust and/or effective. These include the power of the tribunal to make provisional awards; 43  for the tribunal to follow strict
rules of evidence in determining any dispute; 44  providing certain time limits, etc.
Apart from considering aspects of how the arbitral proceedings should be conducted, other provisions can be used to determine
aspects of the dispute resolution process that are outside of the scope of the arbitration proceedings themselves. This allows for
the inclusion of escalation clauses (see Chapter Two) and asymmetric clauses (see Chapter Seven).
Before considering these possibilities, drafters should familiarise themselves with the requirements of the law of the seat and
whether the law will support these types of procedures or remedies. This is important if the involvement of the national courts
in the process is required but runs the risk of overcomplicating matters. It may not be a good idea to be too specific in relation
to the procedures and remedies but, instead, to leave it for the tribunal to decide depending on the circumstances of the case
(or the parties agreeing).
This is especially so if the dispute that arises does not need to have stringent requirements provided or the arbitration clause
makes the determination of the dispute more costly or sets unrealistic requirements or limits. The existing legal framework, the
applicable arbitration rules, together with the arbitration clause containing essential elements, may be enough for the constituted
arbitral tribunal to decide on the application of particular procedures to the dispute in question.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
19
Multi-party and multi-contract disputes
6-028
The complexity of multi-party relationships may require more sophisticated contractual arrangements, where the rights and
obligations of the various parties may be dependent on the outcome of a particular set of proceedings. At the same time, the
dispute may be multifaceted and based on various interlinked contractual arrangements.
In these circumstances, resolution of a dispute between the parties involving arbitration proceedings may be particularly
problematic. This is especially so where the contract drafters did not envisage provisions dealing with multi-party disputes
because, unlike litigation, consent from all parties is likely to be required to arbitrate for the parties involved in the proceedings.
If this consent is not expressed at the point of drafting of the arbitration agreement, gaining the necessary consent may be
particularly problematic after a dispute arises. In the absence of express agreement, parties may try and use the multiplicity of
proceedings or lack of prior agreement, to gain a tactical advantage (e.g. by making it difficult to be sued by the same claimant
or by trying its chances in multiple proceedings).
The problem with multiple proceedings is that, not only could they lead to completely different outcomes, but also more time
and cost could be spent on resolving the disputes through arbitration. This is because each set of proceedings would require an
arbitrators’ involvement, potentially an arbitral institution, and lawyers’ involvement, as well as various submissions, documents
and evidence.
An additional problem is that, with multiple contracts or issues involved and interlinked proceedings, there may be various
findings of fact by different tribunals, and these may be inconsistent. One consequence of this is that awarded remedies may end
up overcompensating one party at the expense of others with difficulties proving this in separate sets of potentially confidential
proceedings.
This can be illustrated by considering a scenario where one party hopes to be awarded separate remedies by trying to sue another
party under separate contracts containing different arbitration clauses alleging each contract had been breached in separate
proceedings arising out of the same or similar facts. Where separate tribunals are involved with each dealing with separate
contracts, and not necessarily concurrently, in the absence of a consolidation provision, the chances of them coming to different
conclusions, with potentially different or overlapping outcomes, are substantial.
In these circumstances, in order to avoid protracted arguments involving complex questions of jurisdiction, consent,
confidentiality and res judicata, a consolidation clause that is entered into before the dispute arose would provide a more
effective way of dealing with the complexity of the situation.
At the same time, if more than two parties are involved in the proceedings or there are a number of interconnected contracts
with more than two parties, a provision for joinder or intervention for a third party before a dispute arises would make it easier
to avoid additional proceedings with potentially inconsistent outcomes later.
Whilst multi-party and multi-contract arbitrations are complex, the issues raised are not insurmountable. Looking at the reports
from some institutions, it is worth noting that the incidence of multi-party arbitrations is not insignificant. LCIA report that
around 20–25% of their arbitration proceedings include more than two parties with 7–8% arising from more than one agreement.
Similarly, ICC report that around 30% of their proceedings are multi-party. 45
Potential mechanisms of addressing multi-party and multi-contract
disputes
6-029

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
20
There are various existing mechanisms that provide for addressing the situation of multi-party and multi-contract disputes. These
include joinder, intervention, consolidation, agreement for a common arbitrator, common hearings and/or common evidence
between two or more sets of arbitration proceedings.
Where there is a multi-party contract or dispute, provision for joinder and/or intervention is important. Joinder is where one
or more parties join a third party to the existing arbitral proceedings. In contrast, intervention is where a third party seeks to
join the proceedings between the other parties. In these circumstances, after joinder or intervention, all parties will be bound by
the award of the tribunal under one set of proceedings. This avoids a situation of inconsistent findings by multiple tribunals, as
well as saving the cost of any additional arbitrations. Costs can be dealt with in one set of proceedings and distributed among
the parties accordingly by the tribunal.
Consolidation is when two or more sets of arbitration proceedings under different contracts are consolidated under one reference/
case number. After consolidation, an award issued in the consolidated proceedings would be binding on all those under that
one reference. It is also possible for there to be more than two parties involved in these separate contracts. This may make the
situation more complicated for the contract drafters, as each party needs to have an equal opportunity to appoint arbitrators.
This can be achieved by either an arbitral institution/appointing authority appointing all arbitrators or the parties appointing
according to their “sides” (see more explanation on this below).
Where full consolidation is not possible or not agreeable, parties could provide for the appointment of a common arbitrator for
two or more sets of proceedings. Although this would not entirely eliminate the possibility of inconsistent findings (given that
evidence heard by the tribunal may be different), the approach to facts and law is at least likely to be similar. The drawback of
this approach is that costs will not be saved by consolidation. There will also be separate awards for each reference, including
in relation to costs, which would only bind the parties in that particular set of proceedings and cannot be passed across to the
parties of the other set of proceedings.
Perhaps, closer to consolidation, it is also possible to agree that the common arbitrator hears common evidence at the concurrent
hearings. This should allow more consistent findings to be made by the common arbitrator, with a saving in the costs of the
hearings and presentation of evidence. However, there will still be separate awards and the question of the distribution of costs
between the parties will not be dealt with in the same way as it could be if the proceedings were consolidated.
If the parties are considering having a common arbitrator and common evidence and concurrent hearings, the provision for
consolidation of the proceedings would be a more effective option. It is also possible in other circumstances that some parties
may be more concerned about preserving confidentiality from some other third parties and, therefore, may decide to appoint a
common arbitrator but not to consolidate the proceedings on this basis.
Where common evidence and concurrent hearings are envisaged, the confidentiality consideration is no longer relevant. It could
then be more reasonable to consolidate the proceedings under one reference to save on the costs of having two separate tribunals
and ensure there are no inconsistent judgments. The costs could then be distributed among the parties accordingly under one
set of proceedings. This may also be procedurally more straightforward with less risk of satellite arguments about how the
concurrent hearings/evidence should be conducted.
When a dispute arises, if there is no provision for consolidation in the contract, one party might be tempted to take advantage
of the lack of prior consent for consolidation from the other side. They could see it as beneficial to run several arbitrations in
parallel relying on a possibility of inconsistent findings or being compensated more. A dominant party may also see an option
to try and drain the financial resources of the other party in an opportunistic attempt to put pressure on them to settle. This
hypothetically aggressive approach is certainly not something that will make the resolution of a dispute more effective or benefit
both parties equally, but illustrates the potential problems that can arise if one or both parties are uncooperative after a dispute
has arisen, where no consolidation provisions were included in the agreement in advance.
Accordingly, if there are related contracts and multiple sets of proceedings, a better approach would be to provide for a possibility
of consolidation of multiple sets of proceedings in advance, at the time of drafting the contract and before any disputes arise.
This is to ensure that this more effective approach is agreed by all possible parties involved and no further argument arises
about that when they are in dispute later on.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
21
Considerations for drafting effective multi-party and multi-contract
clauses
6-030
Depending on the number of parties or contracts involved, separate consideration should be given to how to structure the
arbitration clause/agreement between them. This can be done by drafting a stand-alone or umbrella dispute resolution agreement/
clause to be signed separately by all parties. As an alternative, the parties could sign each contract incorporating an arbitration
agreement by reference to another contract containing identical or compatible arbitration clauses allowing for joinder and
consolidation. The best choice is dependent on the nature of the relationship between the parties involved and the structure of
their contractual arrangements.
If contract drafters choose to have an arbitration clause in each contract, it is better to have an identical clause inserted in order
to avoid any questions of compatibility or their scope and to draft the clause as broadly as possible. Such a clause would then
more readily accommodate a joinder and/or consolidation.
Needless to say, if the parties still decide to include different wording for each arbitration clause in each contract, they at least
need to be compatible in terms of choosing the same governing law, seat of arbitration, and arbitration institution or ad hoc
arbitration. If this is not done, the parties risk having arguments in the event of joinder or consolidation as to whether consent
was given to arbitrate under a particular procedure or whether the tribunal has jurisdiction over the related contract.
It is important to ensure that both the consent of the parties to a particular arbitration procedure, as well as jurisdiction of the
appointed tribunal, are clearly spelled out. Such consent may either be expressly agreed by parties to the arbitration agreement
or derived from the agreement to apply the rules of the arbitral institution containing provisions on joinder/consolidation.
If it is anticipated that disputes may involve more than two parties, or additional contracts, it is better to expressly specify the
consent for joinder/consolidation in the clause. This should avoid further arguments as to whether the rules chosen provide
for such consent or require consent to be agreed by the parties separately. These measures are desirable because it is not clear
whether the parties, if already in dispute, would be amenable to resolving their dispute in one set of proceedings or whether
they may have tactical considerations not to do that later.
In order for a tribunal to be able to make an award in relation to all the related contracts the parties intend for it to rule on, the
agreement must provide for the tribunal to have jurisdiction with respect to those contracts, as well as the issues covered by
them. This can make it important to including a broader wording for the scope of the arbitration clause.
If an arbitration institution is chosen to administer the arbitration, they are likely to provide for a joinder/consolidation
mechanism in their institutional rules. It is better to use the same mechanism provided by the chosen institutional rules to avoid
further arguments on compatibility of the mechanism provided in the clause with the institution rules chosen.
If a separate mechanism is provided, it is important to specify that it will apply instead of the one provided in the institutional
rules. If ad hoc arbitration is chosen, a good starting point is provided by the International Bar Association Guidelines for
Drafting International Arbitration Clauses (2010) (IBA Guidelines 2010), 46  which also includes samples of consolidation and
joinder clauses (discussed in para.6-031).
If a separate or ad hoc mechanism is provided in the arbitration clause, it needs to contain all the details as to the procedure
of joinder and consolidation, in particular, under which circumstances a party would be joined to the proceedings, when and
what proceedings can be consolidated, etc. It also needs to ensure that the tribunal has a power to rule on this (in the event of
controversy) and make a consolidation order. It is also important to specify which tribunal (in the event of consolidation) would
remain as the tribunal for the consolidated proceedings and which one will cease to act.
As proceedings may not start all at the same time, in the event of commencement of the proceedings between two parties,
another point to decide is whether the other party/parties to the contract(s) will be given notice of the proceedings to enable
them to intervene/request consolidation. Given their confidential nature, it is also possible that parties to the contract will not
be automatically informed of the proceedings, unless the same is provided for in the arbitration clause.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
22
Advance notice of the proceedings being commenced, and giving time and opportunity to the parties to join regardless of
whether they are a named party in the request for arbitration, will be able to provide for a more cost-effective and procedurally
straightforward way of dealing with multi-party proceedings from the start. This would also allow them to participate in the
selection of arbitrators and put them on an equal footing with the original parties to the proceedings. For this reason, it is
important to define the time period for the party to intervene/join and agree that they will not proceed to appoint the tribunal
until this period expires.
The mechanism of selection of arbitrators is one of the most controversial issues in multi-party arbitrations. This is because each
party should have equal opportunity to select arbitrators and, therefore, if there are more than two parties, the normal selection
process of each party selecting one arbitrator becomes impossible.
Various arbitral institutions provide for different mechanisms for appointing arbitrators if there are more than two parties in the
dispute. 47  Similar mechanisms could be provided in a separate arbitration clause for an ad hoc arbitration.
One option is to agree that all three arbitrators (in case of a three-member tribunal) would be appointed by a designated
appointing authority. However, in these circumstances, the parties potentially lose one of the advantages of arbitration being the
ability to select their own tribunal. Another possibility is for the parties to make joint appointments on each “side” and then for
the arbitrators appointed by each “side” to appoint a presiding arbitrator or for the institution to appoint a presiding arbitrator.
This option is provided in the IBA guidelines discussed later in para.6-031.
In the event of parties on each “side” not being able to agree an arbitrator, all the arbitrators would be appointed by the arbitration
institution or the designated appointing authority, so as to minimise the risk of bias and to ensure equal treatment of the parties.
Unfortunately, the result of this situation would again be to remove the choice of the tribunal from the parties, although the
parties on each of the “sides” may then be more inclined to agree an arbitrator between themselves, as they are likely to have
fewer conflicting interests.
In order to make an arbitration clause more effective from the start, no matter what mechanism is selected, it is important to
spell it out in the agreement, including what the default mechanism of appointment would be if the parties are unable to agree.
Joinder/consolidation clauses—International Bar Association Guidelines
6-031
The IBA Guidelines 2010 48  provide examples of joinder and consolidation clauses 49  that could be used in ad hoc arbitration
or where a separate mechanism for consolidation and joinder is to be agreed.
The IBA clause starts with the generic wording of an arbitration clause (see more detailed discussion as to what to include in
the wording in the preceding sections of this chapter).
“All disputes arising out of or in connection with this agreement, including any question regarding its
existence, validity, or termination, shall be finally resolved by arbitration under [selected arbitration rules],
except as they may be modified herein or by mutual agreement of the parties.
The place of arbitration shall be [city, country]. The language of arbitration shall be […]. There shall be three
arbitrators, selected as follows.”
The IBA example of the clause further provides for a procedure for selecting arbitrators where there are only two parties that
will participate in the arbitral proceedings, including dealing with a default situation where either a party fails to appoint its
arbitrator or two appointed arbitrators by their respective parties fail to appoint the presiding arbitrator.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
23
“In the event that the request for arbitration names only one claimant and one respondent, and no party
has exercised its right to joinder or intervention in accordance with the paragraphs below, the claimant
and the respondent shall each appoint one arbitrator within [15] days after the expiry of the period during
which parties can exercise their right to joinder or intervention. If either party fails to appoint an arbitrator
as provided, then, upon the application of any party, that arbitrator shall be appointed by [the designated
arbitral institution]. The two arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator, who shall act as presiding arbitrator.
If the two arbitrators fail to appoint the presiding arbitrator within [45] days of the appointment of the
second arbitrator, the presiding arbitrator shall be appointed by [the designated arbitral institution/appointing
authority].”
The clause further deals with the selection of arbitrators in a situation where there will be more than two parties participating
in the proceedings, either because they originally appeared in the request for arbitration or by virtue of joinder or intervention.
The provided procedure requires parties to select arbitrators according to their respective “sides”: claimants or respondents.
“In the event that more than two parties are named in the request for arbitration or at least one contracting
party exercises its right to joinder or intervention in accordance with the paragraphs below, the claimant(s)
shall jointly appoint one arbitrator and the respondent(s) shall jointly appoint the other arbitrator, both within
[15] days after the expiry of the period during which parties can exercise their right to joinder or intervention.
If the parties fail to appoint an arbitrator as provided above, [the designated arbitral institution/appointing
authority] shall, upon the request of any party, appoint all three arbitrators and designate one of them to act
as presiding arbitrator. If the claimant(s) and the respondent(s) appoint the arbitrators as provided above, the
two arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator, who shall act as presiding arbitrator. If the two arbitrators
fail to appoint the third arbitrator within [45] days of the appointment of the second arbitrator, the presiding
arbitrator shall be appointed by [the designated arbitral institution/appointing authority].”
The subsequent paragraphs of the clause deal with the question of notice of arbitration to all the parties of the agreement, as
well as the period during which parties can be joined or intervene.
“Any party to this agreement may, either separately or together with any other party to this agreement, initiate
arbitration proceedings pursuant to this clause by sending a request for arbitration to all other parties to this
agreement [and to the designated arbitral institution, if any].
Any party to this agreement may intervene in any arbitration proceedings hereunder by submitting a written
notice of claim, counterclaim or cross-claim against any party to this agreement, provided that such notice
is also sent to all other parties to this agreement [and to the designated arbitral institution, if any] within
[30] days from the receipt by such intervening party of the relevant request for arbitration or notice of claim,
counterclaim or cross-claim.
Any party to this agreement named as respondent in a request for arbitration, or a notice of claim,
counterclaim or cross-claim, may join any other party to this agreement in any arbitration proceedings
hereunder by submitting a written notice of claim, counterclaim or cross-claim against that party, provided
that such notice is also sent to all other parties to this agreement [and to the designated arbitral institution,
if any] within [30] days from the receipt by such respondent of the relevant request for arbitration or notice
of claim, counterclaim or cross-claim.”

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
24
The next part of the clause confirms the very important point that all the parties under the same proceedings will be bound by the
award of the tribunal. This applies whether they decide to participate in the proceedings themselves or not. This could happen,
for example, if after agreeing this clause under the contract, they were joined to the proceedings but decided for whatever reason
not to take part in them.
“Any joined or intervening party shall be bound by any award rendered by the arbitral tribunal even if such
party chooses not to participate in the arbitration proceedings.”
Dealing with multi-contract situations, it is important to provide for a mechanism for consolidation of two or more sets of
proceedings in the arbitration clause. The IBA Guidelines 2010 gives an example of such a clause in its para.113.
The IBA mechanism of consolidation is provided in the clause through an application to the tribunal for a consolidation order.
“The parties’ consent to the consolidation of arbitrations commenced hereunder and/or under [the related
agreements] as follows. If two or more arbitrations are commenced hereunder and/or [the related agreements],
any party named as claimant or respondent in any of these arbitrations may petition any arbitral tribunal
appointed in these arbitrations for an order that the several arbitrations be consolidated in a single arbitration
before that arbitral tribunal (a ‘Consolidation Order’). In deciding whether to make such a Consolidation
Order, that arbitral tribunal shall consider whether the several arbitrations raise common issues of law or
facts and whether to consolidate the several arbitrations would serve the interests of justice and efficiency.”
The clause further deals with consequences of termination of the appointment of the tribunal in the arbitration, which was
consolidated into the first/main arbitration. It is important to provide that the acts of the tribunal, whose functions are going to
be terminated, will be valid up to the point of the termination of its appointment.
“If before a Consolidation Order is made by an arbitral tribunal with respect to another arbitration, arbitrators
have already been appointed in that other arbitration, their appointment terminates upon the making of such
Consolidation Order and they are deemed to be functus officio. Such termination is without prejudice to:
(i) the validity of any acts done or orders made by them prior to the termination, (ii) their entitlement to be
paid their proper fees and disbursements, (iii) the date when any claim or defence was raised for the purpose
of applying any limitation bar or any like rule or provision, (iv) evidence adduced and admissible before
termination, which evidence shall be admissible in arbitral proceedings after the Consolidation Order, and
(v) the parties’ entitlement to legal and other costs incurred before termination.
In the event of two or more conflicting Consolidation Orders, the Consolidation Order that was made first
in time shall prevail.”
Further important wording is provided in para.109 of the IBA Guidelines 2010, which deals with the tribunal’s jurisdiction over
all the related agreements. This is important to clarify if there is no stand-alone dispute resolution protocol but, instead, each
related contract contains a separate arbitration clause. This is because the tribunal in the consolidated proceedings will have
to deal with all the related agreements and will not be able to do that unless its jurisdiction over all of them is confirmed or
established. In order to avoid any challenges to the jurisdiction of the tribunal, it is important to clarify this from the start in
the arbitration clause for each related agreement.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
25
“The parties agree that an arbitral tribunal appointed hereunder or under [the related agreement(s)] may
exercise jurisdiction with respect to both this agreement and [the related agreement(s)].”
The consolidation procedure is helpful to deal with multiple arbitration proceedings, especially where there is no national
court power to consolidate. It deals with the potential issue of parallel proceedings, escalating courts and sometimes even
irreconcilable awards. However, drafting such clauses in multi-contract situations, especially if multiple parties are also
involved, is going to be very complicated. It may also give rise in certain jurisdictions to a possibility of class arbitrations,
which the drafters might want to exclude. In this regard, the contract drafters need to approach the question of inclusion of their
own consolidation/joinder clauses with caution.
As an alternative, it may be easier and more effective to rely on the procedure provided by the arbitration rules of the arbitration
institution selected. 50  An additional benefit is that, in the event of a dispute, parties will also be able to rely on the expertise of
the arbitration institution or arbitrators to deal with any issues related to the interpretation of those rules. Providing for advanced
consent of the parties for a joinder, intervention and/or consolidation in the clause itself, in addition to the consolidation/joinder
mechanism provided in the selected arbitration rules, may be the best way to strike the optimum balance of simplicity and
caution.
Enforcement considerations when selecting arbitration for effective
dispute resolution
6-032
When deciding whether to select arbitration or litigation as a binding dispute resolution method, the parties need to consider
how easy it is going to be to enforce the outcome (meaning judgment or award) in another country. In this regard, one of the
most important factors in selecting arbitration, in preference to litigation, is that the mechanism of enforcement is simplified
and streamlined by virtue of the widespread application of the New York Convention. 51
This powerful instrument has over 170 signatories and brings recognition and power to arbitration processes around the world.
It provides for recognition and enforcement of international arbitral awards made under a valid arbitration agreement in the
contracting countries. It also provides simple requirements for applying for the recognition and enforcement of the award (see
art.IV of the New York Convention). According to this Convention, foreign arbitral awards must be recognised and enforced
in another contracting state and may be refused only under very limited grounds (see art.V of the New York Convention).
The grounds of refusal have been split into bullet-points for easy references, as follows:
 
• Incapacity of the parties to the agreement under the law to which they are subject to (art.V(1)(a)).
 
• Invalidity of the agreement under the governing law of the arbitration agreement or if not indicated, under the law of the
country where the award was made (art.V(1)(a)).
 
• The party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment of the arbitrator or of the
arbitration proceedings (art.V(1)(b)).
 
• This party was otherwise unable to present its case (art.V(1)(b)).
 
• The award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within terms of the arbitration agreement (art.V(1)
(c)).
 
• The award contains decisions on matters beyond scope of the arbitration agreement (art.V(1)(c)).
 
• The composition of tribunal was not in accordance with the parties’ agreement or law of country in which arbitration
took place (art.V(1)(d)).

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
26
 
• The arbitral procedure was not in accordance with parties’ agreement or law of country in which arbitration took place
(art.V(1)(d)).
 
• The award has not yet become binding (art.V(1)(e)).
 
• The award has been set aside or suspended in the country where or under the law of which it was made (art.V(1)(e)).
 
• The matter is not capable of settlement by arbitration (art.V(2)(a)).
 
• The recognition or enforcement would be contrary to public policy (art.V(2)(b)).
The above list is exhaustive and, as can be seen, the grounds for refusing recognition are rather limited. For the purpose of
contract drafters, in order to try to reduce the potential for disputes over the enforceability of the award, the potential grounds
for resisting the recognition of the awards should be considered at the time when the contract is drafted.
An obvious example is to make sure that the arbitration agreement, or arbitration clause, is drafted to be valid under the law
applicable to the arbitration agreement, as well as any other laws (law of the seat/governing law). It is also important to ensure
that there is no contention between the parties as to what the law of the arbitration agreement is (see para.6-020 for further
details). It follows that that the contract drafters need to be familiar with the applicable laws or seek advice from local lawyers.
If there is any doubt about the capacity of the parties to conclude the arbitration agreement, it is also important that this is
checked against applicable laws. The New York Convention reinforces this point as lack of capacity is a ground for enforcement
being refused.
So far as possible, in order to avoid any arguments regarding the respondent not being given a proper notice, the notice provision
needs to be straightforward and unambiguous. Providing for a number of methods to give this notice can help to avoid technical
arguments about personal service or postal service in case of disputed delivery.
As one of the grounds for refusing the recognition or enforcement deals with the scope of the arbitration agreement, it is also
important to make the scope of the arbitration agreement as broad as possible. This reduces the risk of the other side arguing
later that the award deals with a dispute that is not covered by the arbitration agreement.
In order to avoid subsequent arguments as to the composition of the tribunal at the enforcement stage, drafters should make
sure that they specify the procedure for appointment of the arbitral tribunal as clearly as possible and deal with the question
of how arbitrators are going to be appointed in default.
In order to avoid further delays and challenges to the award and its enforcement either at the national courts of the seat or at
the relevant enforcing court, the law of the seat should be checked for any inconsistencies between the procedure specified in
the arbitration agreement and the law of the seat.
Parties should bear in mind the law of the country where they may subsequently need to enforce any award. This is because
under art.V(2) the dispute has to be capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of that country and can be also challenged
on the basis of the public policy of that country. Although public policy arguments are normally difficult to run in arbitration-
friendly jurisdictions, this may not be the case for every country. It is better to check in advance as to whether there are specific
requirements by the law of this country regarding arbitration awards and their enforcement. In this context, it is important to
understand that the most relevant country for considering enforcement is the country (or countries) where the assets of the
relevant party are located.
If a potential country for enforcement, or of the seat, is not a party to the New York Convention, 52  it may be wise, where possible,
to try to avoid this jurisdiction as a seat and obtain further legal advice from local lawyers as to the additional requirements for
the recognition and enforcement of the awards there. This is necessary because the process of enforcement there may not be as
straightforward as in a state that is a party to the New York Convention.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
27
International arbitration in the context of other methods of dispute
resolution
6-033
Given that arbitration is a final and binding method of dispute resolution, it is perceived more as an alternative to litigation,
as opposed to other dispute resolution methods. Moreover, as discussed in para.7-003, it has a better structured framework of
enforcement of arbitration awards worldwide than court judgments of a particular jurisdiction would have. Therefore, arbitration
is often chosen for international disputes, as it provides a final resolution to a dispute on a more cross-jurisdictional scale.
Despite all the advantages that arbitration brings, it should not be “idealised” as providing the only effective solution to problems
with the dispute resolution process. Even with an international framework for enforcement, the successful party could still find
itself dragged into a new dispute of trying to enforce an award in another jurisdiction or be on the other side of the award being
challenged in domestic courts.
Moreover, the personality and methods of a particular arbitrator or appointed tribunal may not necessarily lead to the most
efficient and fair process and could, to some extent, be subject to abuse by some. One of the issues is that, whilst they can be
certified, arbitrators are not regulated unless they belong to a particular organisation or are regulated as lawyers by their national
authorities. This means that if parties have not done their due diligence on the arbitrator, the consequences of their decision-
making process can become very unpredictable and may not help either parties or the process. This is not to say that similar
problems of potential bias and inefficiency never apply to judges in litigation but, if this is the case, there is a potential route
of appeal that has more options than arbitration.
These issues with arbitration highlight why it is important not to lose sight of other methods of dispute resolution, used in
conjunction with arbitration or instead of it. This may be achieved by either attempting to resolve any dispute without initiating
formal, final and binding dispute resolution processes, or by interrupting/pausing that process in an attempt to resolve the
dispute, when formal (for example, arbitration) proceedings are already ongoing, or even after those proceedings are completed.
An example of the above could be Med-Arb. 53  This is where the parties attempt mediation first and then, if unsuccessful,
they could proceed to arbitration. Nobody prohibits them (and it could even be encouraged in some jurisdictions) to make
another attempt to mediate even when the arbitration proceedings are ongoing. 54  If the parties manage to settle their dispute
by mediation or otherwise, they could ask the tribunal to enter an award by consent and treat the arbitration proceedings as
terminated by consent.
At the same time, even if the arbitration proceedings concluded and the award has been issued, there may still be a room for the
parties to have further discussions on the settlement. No matter how paradoxical this sounds, especially given that arbitration
is considered to bring a final and binding resolution to the dispute, as stated above, this may not be the end of the matter and
the matter may proceed further to courts for challenges or enforcement proceedings.
If the winning party envisages complications that could follow from the award in national courts, it may consider whether to
approach the losing party for further considerations of settlement. It may well be that an immediate (or almost immediate)
payment of a sum of money at a discounted rate or a reduction/removal of interest due may better suit its interests, rather than
incurring further delays and costs in national courts in an attempt to enforce the award, if this considered to be a particular
issue in the case.
These potential settlement options still remain, even after the award is issued. Due care and consideration should at least be given
to the two main factors of time and costs. Furthermore, the parties should also consider such additional factors as preserving
business relationships between the parties; business reputation; risks of the dispute and the award becoming public; and even
entering into a new deal or contract with the same business partner. If an old dispute is resolved amicably and reasonably, this
can actually strengthen a partnership and allow the parties to move on with their business relationship.
All these factors could be considered either before initiating arbitration, during arbitration or even after the award in terms of
whether some other dispute resolution method, such as mediation or negotiation, should be attempted. What is important is to
bear all these potential interests in mind from the time when the dispute arises, in order to find the best approach to resolve the
dispute between the parties in the most effective way.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
28
Although it can be difficult if one party tries to take fair and considerate steps and the other party does not reciprocate, the mutual
benefit of a more balanced approach can be significantly higher than simply embarking on prolonged and costly arbitration
proceedings, whose outcome can rarely, if ever, be predicted due to third parties (arbitrators) being involved in the decision-
making process.
Footnotes
1
See, for example, the UK Supreme Court’s decision in AES Ust-Kamenogorsk Hydropower Plant LLP v Ust-
Kamenogorsk Hydropower Plant JSC [2013] UKSC 35; [2013] 1 W.L.R. 1889.
2
See para.6-022 for the discussion regarding choosing a seat of arbitration.
3
See further discussion on the difference between litigation and arbitration in Chapter Eight.
4
Examples of institutions set up during the early phase of globalisation include: London Maritime Arbitrators Association
(LMAA, 1960); ICSID (International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes, 1966); JAMS (Judicial
Arbitration and Mediation Services, 1979); HKIAC (Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre, 1985); SIAC
(Singapore International Arbitration Centre, 1991); AAA/ICDR (American Arbitration Association/International Centre
for Dispute Resolution); Centro de Arbitraje y Mediación de la Cámara de Comercio de Santiago (CAM Santiago, 1992);
Câmara de Conciliação, Mediação e Arbitragem CIESP/FIESP (Sao Paolo, 1995).
5
More recently established institutions include Vienna International Arbitration Centre (VIAC, 2006); Dubai
International Arbitration Centre (DIAC, 2008); Shenzhen Court of International Arbitration (SCIA, 2009); Nairobi
Centre for International Arbitration (NCIA, 2013); and the International Arbitration Centre/Astana International Finance
Centre (IAC/AIFC, 2001/2015).
6
United Nations General Assembly, UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (UNCITRAL Rules), Resolution adopted by the
General Assembly on 9 December 2021, A/RES/76/108.
7
Examples of institutions prepared to administer UNCITRAL Rules include LCIA, SIAC (under SIAC Practice Note PN
03/07 (1 July 2007), and HKIAC (under 2015 HKIAC Procedures for the Administration of International Arbitration).
8
For example, International Arbitration Centre (IAC) at the Astana International Financial Centre (AIFC).
9
HKIAC Administered Arbitration Rules 2015 pursuant to para.2 of Sch.1 to the Rules. Where the amount in dispute
is not quantified, pursuant to para.2.5 of Sch.1 to the Rules, HKIAC’s administrative fees shall be fixed by HKIAC,
considering the circumstances of the case. Where, pursuant to art.10 of the Rules, the fees of the arbitral tribunal are to
be determined in accordance with para.9 of Sch.2: (a) subject to para.9.5 of that Schedule, the maximum agreed hourly
rate of an arbitrator will be HKD 6,500 per hour.
10
LCIA Schedule of Costs (effective 1 October 2020) for arbitrations conducted under the LCIA Arbitration Rules (LCIA
Rules). This schedule of arbitration costs (Schedule of Costs), as amended from time to time by the LCIA, forms part
of the LCIA Rules and will apply in all arbitrations commenced after its effective date.
11
New York Convention art.II(1) requires Member States to recognise arbitration agreements, if they are made in writing.
See also the UK Arbitration Act 1996 s.5.
12
Examples of institutions providing standard arbitration clauses include: United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law (UNCITRAL); International Chamber of Commerce (ICC); Chartered Institute of Arbitrators (CIArb);
(Singapore International Arbitration Centre (SIAC); London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA); Hong Kong
International Arbitration Centre (HKIAC); International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID);
American Arbitration Association/International Centre for Dispute Resolution (AAA/ICDR).
13
Irene Welser and Susanne Molitoris, “The Scope of Arbitration Clauses - Or: ‘All Disputes Arising out of or in connection
with this Contract…’ ” in C. Klausegger et al., Austrian Yearbook on International Arbitration (Wein, 2012); p.17;
Premium Nafta Products Ltd v Fili Shipping Co Ltd [2007] UKHL 40; [2007] Bus. L.R. 1719; Fiona Trust & Holding
Corp v Privalov [2015] EWHC 527 (Comm); Cape Flattery Ltd v Titan Maritime, LLC [2011] 09-15682 (US Court of
Appeals, 9th Circuit 2011).
14
See, for example, HKIAC.
15
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules art.1(5) incorporates the Expedited Rules, which are presented as an appendix to the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The phrase “where the parties so agree” in that paragraph emphasises the need for the
parties’ express consent for the Expedited Rules to apply to the arbitration.
16
SCC Expedited Arbitration Rules 2017, HKIAC Administered Arbitration Rules 2018 and the SIAC Rules 2016.
17
ICC Rules 2021 art.30, Appendix VI, ICDR Rules 2021.

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
29
18
See, for example, ICC Rules 2021 art.12(3), (4) and (9); ICDR Rules 2021 art.13; LCIA Rules 2020 art.5(9); SCC Rules
2023 art.17(3) and (4).
19
© International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). Reproduced with kind permission of ICC.
20
Dutco Construction v BKMI Industrienlagen GmbH et Siemens AG, Arret de la Cour de Cassation 89-18.708; Siemens
AG and BKMI Industrieanlangen GmbH v Dutco Construction Co, Ltd, France Court of Cassation Bull. civ. I, No. 2r
(Fr.), 7 Mealey’s Int’l Arb. Rep. B-3; [1993] 18 Y.B. Comm. Arb. 140 (1992).
21
See, for example, ICC Rules 2021 art.13(5) and (6); ICDR Rules 2021 art.13(4); LCIA Rules 2020 art.6(1); SCC Rules
2023 art.17(6).
22
See Kabab-Ji SAL (Lebanon) v Kout Food Group (Kuwait) [2021] UKSC 48; [2021] Bus. L.R. 1717 at [32], that there
appears to be no consensus among national courts of different jurisdictions and jurists as to “whether or when a choice of
law for the contract as a whole constitutes a sufficient indication of the law to which the parties subjected the arbitration
agreement, in particular where it differs from the law of the seat”.
23
See Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v OOO Insurance Company Chubb [2020] UKSC 38; [2020] 1 W.L.R. 4117; Kabab-Ji
SAL (Lebanon) v Kout Food Group (Kuwait) [2021] Bus. L.R. 1717.
24
Law Commission, Review of the Arbitration Act 1996, Second Consultation Paper (March 2023), Consultation Paper
258, Ch.2, para.2.6.
25
Law Commission, Review of the Arbitration Act 1996, Summary of final report (September 2023), para.1.142.
26
Law Commission, Review of the Arbitration Act 1996, Summary of final report (2023), para.1.138.
27
Law Commission, Review of the Arbitration Act 1996, Summary of final report (2023), para.1.143.
28
See, for example, Arbitration Act 1996 ss.2(1) and 3.
29
See, for example, ICC Rules 2021 art.26(1), LCIA Rules 2020 art.19(2) and SCC Rules 2023 art.32(2).
30
Drafters could consider familiarising themselves with the text of the UNCITRAL Model Law on International
Commercial Arbitration (1985, with amendments as adopted in 2006) (UNCITRAL Model Law), providing a good
example of the procedures used by the arbitral tribunals (if they seat in the jurisdictions adopted UNCITRAL Model
Law). If a jurisdiction, which has not adopted it, is chosen, their rules could be compared to the UNCITRAL Model
Law rules.
31
Perhaps, notedly, one of the world’s most popular seats of arbitration, England, has not adopted the UNCITRAL Model
Law, although many provisions of the Arbitration Act 1996 are based on it.
32
Law Commission, Review of the Arbitration Act 1996, Summary of final report (2023), paras 1.133–1.134.
33
Lord Neuberger, Keynote Speech, London International Disputes Week, (16 May 2023).
34
The Right Hon. The Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd, Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales, “Developing commercial
law through the courts: rebalancing the relationship between the courts and arbitration”, The Bailii Lecture 2016 (9
March 2016).
35
See, for instance, Ali Shipping Corp v Shipyard Trogir [1999] 1 W.L.R. 314; [1998] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 643 CA, holding that
confidentiality is implied in the arbitration agreement.
36
See, for example, art.30 of the LCIA Rules 1998, 2014 and 2020; art.22.3 of the ICC Rules 2012, 2017 and 2021;
art.28(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules 2010, 2013 and 2021.
37
ICC, Note to parties and arbitral tribunals on the conduct of the arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration (December
2018), paras 40–46.
38
HKIAC Administered Arbitration Rules 2018 para.45.5.
39
Law Commission, Review of the Arbitration Act 1996, Summary of consultation paper (September 2022), https://
www.lawcom.gov.uk/project/review-of-the-arbitration-act-1996/.
40
Law commission, Review of the Arbitration Act 1996, Summary of consultation paper (2022), paras 1.19–1.20.
41
Law commission, Review of the Arbitration Act 1996, Summary of final report (2023), paras 1.16–1.23.
42
See, for example, UNCITRAL Rules 2013 art.28.3; LCIA Rules 2020 arts 19.4 and 30; ICC Rules 2021 art.22.3;
UNCITRAL Rules 2010 r.34.5 (in relation to the awards).
43
See, for example, Arbitration Act 1996 s.39.
44
See, for example, Arbitration Act 1996 s.34(2)(f).
45
ICC, ICC Dispute Resolution 2020: Statistics (August 2021), p.9.
46
Adopted by a resolution of the International Bar Association (IBA) Council 7 October 2010.
47
See, for example, LCIA Rules 2020 art.8; SCC Rules 2023 art.17(5); ICC Rules 2021 art.12(8); ICDR Rules 2021
art.13(5).
48
IBA, IBA Guidelines for Drafting International Arbitration Clauses (IBA Guidelines) (October 2010).

Chapter 6 - Arbitration, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291546 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
30
49
An example of an arbitration clause providing for an intervention and a joinder by a party to the same agreement can
be found at para.105 of the IBA Guidelines 2010.
50
See, for example, LCIA Rules 2020 art.22.7; SCC Rules 2023 art.15; ICC Rules 2021 art.10; ICDR Rules 2021 art.9.
51
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York, 1958) (the “New York
Convention”), https://uncitral.un.org/en/texts/arbitration/conventions/foreign_arbitral_awards/.
52
United Nations, “Status: Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York, 1958)
(the ‘New York Convention’)”, https://uncitral.un.org/en/texts/arbitration/conventions/foreign_arbitral_awards/status2.
53
See Chapter Eight for more details.
54
An example is SIAC, which provides for an Arb-Med-Arb process.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
