Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 3 - Mediation
A Practical Guide to Effective Dispute Resolution: Methods & Clauses 1st Ed.
Mainwork
Part 1 - Non-binding Dispute Resolution Methods and Escalation Clauses
Chapter 3 - Mediation
Overview and purpose of the clause
3-001
The purpose of a mediation clause is to move the parties to an alternative dispute resolution (ADR) phase that, by definition,
involves an independent neutral third-party mediator whose role is to try and facilitate the parties reaching a mutually acceptable
agreement before litigation or arbitration commences. In contrast, a negotiation clause largely relies on the parties’ internal
processes, mainly involving the parties in discussions with each other.
Similar to negotiation, the potential benefits of resolving a dispute through mediation include avoiding the costs and risks of
litigation with the added benefit that the parties retain control of the decision on whether or not to settle. In addition, in a
mediated agreement, as with a negotiated settlement, it is possible to agree solutions that a court does not have the power to
order and to keep the settlement, and any disclosures, confidential.
Evidence of the power of mediation as a tool for effective dispute resolution can be found in the Tenth Mediation Audit of
commercial mediators carried out by the Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution (CEDR). 1  Looking at this report, and earlier
CEDR reports, over a 10-year period (from 2012 to 2023), these audits show a consistent figure of around 70–75% of commercial
disputes settled on the mediation day, with a further 20% of disputes settling shortly after. To show that this figure of settlement
rates on the day of mediation is not a unique feature of UK dispute resolution, it is mirrored by CEDR Asia Pacific who report
that, of the 650 commercial mediations they arrange each year, the settlement rate remains consistent at between 75–80% on
the day of mediation. 2
Given the costs and time taken to follow a binding dispute resolution process (either arbitration or litigation), this combined
settlement rate of around 90% should be borne in mind when considering whether to engage in mediation.
The principal features of mediation are that it: 3
 
• involves a neutral third party to facilitate negotiations;
 
• can be relatively quick to set up and is inexpensive, and, in most circumstances, is without prejudice and confidential;
 
• involves party representatives with the authority to settle;
 
• is flexible and puts the parties in control, enabling the process to be designed and managed by the mediator to suit the
parties, in consultation with them;
 
• enables the parties to devise solutions which are not possible in an adjudicative process such as litigation or arbitration,
and which may benefit all the parties, particularly if there is the possibility of a continuing relationship between them; and
 
• can be used in both domestic and cross-border disputes, two-party and multi-party disputes, and whether or not litigation
or arbitration has been commenced.

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Styles of mediation
3-002
All approaches to mediation share a common thread in using an independent third-party mediator to help the parties resolve
their dispute by facilitating an adjustment to their relative positions and reaching a compromise settlement by consent.
However, underneath the umbrella heading, different styles of mediation can be found in different circumstances, most often
determined by a specific cultural approach and/or acceptance of just how involved the mediator is in formulating the final
compromise.
Although there are many examples of hybrid approaches (depending on the country and the mediator themselves) the differences
can be considered under the broad headings of “facilitative” and “evaluative” mediation. 4
In facilitative mediation, the mediator is neutral and helps the parties reach their own, mutually agreeable solutions. To achieve
this, the mediator typically asks open questions and encourages co-operation between the parties.
In evaluative mediation, 5  the mediator adopts a more advisory role and can actively provide opinions, assess the relative
strengths and weaknesses of each party’s case and even offer some indication of a likely outcome if the dispute were to go
to court. There is no prescriptive process and the practical approach varies from mediator to mediator. The benefits of using
evaluative mediation bring it a bit closer to the reasons why parties might consider early neutral evaluation (ENE) and supports
the trend towards combining ENE with mediation.
Whilst there are clear conceptual differences, the approach to mediation should be considered to be a spectrum approach, where
the balance between facilitation and evaluation can vary between mediations or mediators as well as from issue to issue within
a mediation.
The benefit of a pure facilitative approach, where the parties identify their own preferences and their agreed solution, is that the
parties are more likely to own the outcome and not attribute blame to the mediator for somehow encouraging them to accept a
solution that they might actually end up regretting. Having said that, if the parties are stuck, a skilled evaluative mediator can
guide them towards a solution that they may not have been able to identify themselves. Independent of whether the solution is
arrived at via facilitation or evaluation, one of the main mutual benefits can be the preservation of business relationships.
In practice there is often a blurred line between facilitative and evaluative mediation styles as even a facilitative mediator will
pose questions that cause the parties to reflect on outcomes, litigation risk and similar. Most mediation training focuses on the
facilitative approach.
There is also a third model of mediation that is sometimes referred to as “transformative mediation”, 6  in which the objective
is closer to providing a more holistic approach, so that the outcome of the resolution of the immediate dispute is a deeper
understanding of each other’s perspective 7  and a transformation of the long-term relationship between the parties. 8
Transformative mediation focuses on the key principles of empowerment and recognition and seeks to change the way that
the parties relate to each other rather than focusing on the transactional elements of the instant dispute. This is in contrast to
evaluative mediation, where the mediator plays a key role in guiding the parties towards a resolution based on the mediator’s
evaluation of a case. In this sense, transformative mediation is closer to facilitative mediation with its focus on communication
but goes beyond helping the parties to find a solution just to their dispute and tries to empower the parties to improve their
relationship, with the resolution of the dispute being a stepping stone to a better future relationship.
Whilst it has clear potential long-term benefits, the downside to transformative mediation is that it takes time and requires the
dedicated involvement of the parties. As it is more idealistic in nature, it is not always suited to high-stakes, legally focused
disputes but works well if parties are seeking a deeper change to their dynamic rather than a quick fix.
There are some differences in regional approach with evaluative mediation generally being favoured in the US, and UK/Europe
preferring a facilitative approach. In Asia-Pacific, mediation has traditionally aligned more closely with the facilitative principles
as these increase the prospects for consensus and preserving social harmony.

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
However, given the increasing levels of globalisation and commercial complexity, the overall trend in international commercial
dispute resolution is towards blending these styles. This hybrid approach is characterised by an evaluation of relative strengths
and weaknesses of cases in various jurisdictions, commonly followed by facilitated conversations focused on mutual gain and
collaborative resolution.
When considering including mediation in a contractual dispute resolution clause, it is worth confirming the other party’s
perception and expectations of what mediation may involve. If the parties have different experience and expectations, this may
highlight why one party might be more or less keen on mediation than another. In any event, it is important to ensure that both
parties have the same understanding of what mediation involves before agreeing to include a mediation clause.
It is also important that parties considering mediation discuss and agree the approach that they wish their mediator to take
and ensure that their selected mediator has the ability to conduct the mediation in this agreed way. If the parties cannot agree
on which approach they wish to take, in order to maintain the perception of neutrality and independence, it can be better for
the parties to ask the mediator to operate in a facilitative mode at the start. If there is progress but the parties find themselves
deadlocked, either party can indicate to the mediator that they would welcome a transition to a more evaluative mode where the
mediator makes proposals for solutions. If requested, before proposing any solutions, the mediator should seek confirmation
from both sides that they agree for this to happen.
In addition, the parties are encouraged to consider the duration of the mediation. Most mediation training and most mediators
focus on the one-day mediation of litigated disputes. However, the earlier the parties engage in mediation, possibly under the
requirements of an escalation clause, the more time they may need to be allocated for the mediation process. The additional time
is required to allow the mediator the time needed to prepare the parties for the mediation, exchange information, identify issues
and to coach the parties, so they are best placed to work together towards identifying possible resolution options. Mediation
under an escalation clause runs the risk of failure if insufficient direction is given to the parties in how to conduct the mediation
and if insufficient time is allowed for the process to develop.
The role of a mediator
3-003
The role of the mediator will depend on whether the parties have agreed to evaluative or facilitative mediation. In a facilitative
mediation, it is a fundamental point that the mediator does not decide the case on its merits, or advise the parties on their relative
merits, but facilitates the parties’ exchanging information about what they are seeking and helps them understand each other’s
interests. This works best when both parties are completely frank and open with the mediator about their true positions and
bottom lines.
Although an evaluative mediator will be much more involved in putting forward their own views about how the dispute should
be resolved, even judging the merits of a party’s case, it is important to understand that, as mediation is non-binding, if a mediator
is to stand any chance of getting the parties to reach agreement, they will still need to gain the trust and confidence of both
parties. This is even more important for a mediator who adopts an evaluative role as, otherwise, by indicating that they believe
one party is in a stronger position than another, they run the risk of giving the impression that they are biased.
The common principle is that an open exchange with the mediator (who will not reveal any information to the other side without
express consent) will ultimately lead to both parties conceding some points and, by so doing, to narrow the gap to the point
where it can be bridged, and a mutually acceptable settlement found. The nature of the confidential exchanges with the mediator
(whose independence requires they cannot have had any previous dealings with the parties) means that the parties often have a
natural concern about whether the mediator can be trusted not to give their hand away.
A good mediator will have the ability to uncover and understand the underlying interests of each party, often going beyond
the previously stated positions that may have been pleaded or expressed in an adversarial and polarising way. The mediator
will only be able to act effectively if they can gain the trust and confidence of both parties. It is particularly important that the
mediator is able to convince both parties that they will communicate a party’s position to the other side without passing on any
other information unless it is expressly authorised.

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
In this sense, the mediator should be aiming to enhance the communication between the parties by removing any emotional
overtone and clarifying the parties’ respective positions. In discussing and exchanging interests, the mediator will try and help
parties brainstorm and propose new options for resolving the dispute. Even in a facilitative mediation, the mediator has a role in
assisting the parties to evaluate their options and the potential consequences of putting forward new solutions and/or accepting
the other party’s proposals.
In most circumstances, a mediator will not (or should not…) give legal advice to either party. However, if a party does not have
legal representation, the mediator might try and explain legal terms if these are important for an understanding of the parties’
respective positions.
If the parties have agreed to what is called “judicial mediation” (where the mediator is a judge in their normal role but, for the
purposes of dispute resolution, is acting as a mediator), there is a possibility that the judicial mediator might give indications
about what is likely to happen in court if the dispute is unresolved and, as a result, moves to a litigation phase. In this event, any
such indications will always be caveated—typically by the judicial mediator stating they do not have all the facts, so their views
are not fully considered. Judicial mediation is most often found in resolving employment and family disputes but, more rarely,
can also be used in resolving civil claims. A judge who acts as a mediator cannot be the judge in any subsequent substantive
hearings.
Expectations of mediation
3-004
Whether a mediator actively proposes fresh solutions or focuses on stimulating or encouraging the parties to develop their own
solutions, can depend on the established practice in the country where a mediation is taking place.
As has been mentioned, this difference in national experience could mean that, if and when a clause is activated, a mediation
clause in a contract between parties who come from different backgrounds could lead to the parties going into the mediation
with different expectations. It is also important to recognise that different cultures may place varying degrees of emphasis on
direct communications between parties and the decision-making capacity of a mediator/mediation session.
It is crucial for both sides to understand that “mediation is not just about one side getting what they want. That is a misconception
of the purpose of mediation. Mediation should be about attempting to reach a solution which both parties can live with as a
better alternative to litigation”. 9
Parties typically go into mediation with their preferred outcome firmly fixed in their mind. This is to be discouraged as that
outcome becomes an anchor or a fixed reference point, which parties then struggle to move away from. Having a preferred
outcome blocks parties from genuinely considering a broad range of different resolution options. As indicated in the above
quote, it inhibits the parties from exploring solutions that they can both live with.
National legislation
3-005
Some countries may have specific laws and regulations governing mediation whilst others may not. National laws range from
specifying mediation as being mandatory and applying penalties if a party refuses to attend (without good cause) through to a
milder encouragement of just asking parties whether they are willing to attend mediation.
Whilst the law in a particular jurisdiction can require mediation as a pre-condition before commencing litigation (referred to as
“mandatory mediation” or “court ordered mediation”), it is unenforceable to impose a requirement that the parties must resolve
their dispute through mediation.
Behind legislation requiring the parties to attempt mediation lay the same reasons for including a mediation clause in a
contractual agreement. The additional incentive for the legislators in a jurisdiction to impose this obligation is that, if successful,

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
mediation would take pressure off an overloaded and expensive court system. The approaches are similar because both mandate
that the parties will mediate—the mandatory nature is either contractual (in an escalation clause) or imposed via national
legislation or court rules.
By way of illustration, although the exact requirements vary from state to state, many US states have implemented mandatory
mediation programs for various types of cases, including commercial dispute resolution. 10  The primary difference between
states is whether the mediation step is a “must” or a “may”. In England and Wales, it was initially established in 2004 that,
whilst parties are strongly encouraged to mediate, they cannot be compelled. 11  However, in 2023 this position was overturned
in the Court of Appeal, which determined that, whilst statute does not require parties to mediate, a court can lawfully order a
stay in proceedings and compel the parties to engage in a “non-court-based dispute resolution process”. 12  Even without such
an order, if a party refuses to go to mediation unreasonably, a court may impose cost sanctions.
The EU has also encouraged the use of mediation in cross-border civil and commercial disputes. Directive 2008/52 on certain
aspects of mediation in civil and commercial matters (the EU Mediation Directive) 13  promotes mediation and requires member
states to encourage its use in various civil and commercial matters. The Directive applies to cross-border disputes and foresees
that EU Member States must provide for agreements reached through mediation to be enforceable. The Directive is focused on
encouragement and does not impose an obligation on parties to mediate or impose any sanctions for a failure to mediate.
By way of illustration, Italy is an example of an EU state that made mediation mandatory before litigation proceedings start in
certain types of disputes. 14  This legislation followed the EU Mediation Directive and established that compulsory mediation is
a precondition for taking to court a number of disputes related to property rights, division among heirs, hereditary succession,
family covenants, rentals, loans, company leases, claims for damages from road or water traffic accidents, medical liability and
defamation in the press or other means of publicity. Anyone who wants to go to court over a dispute concerning any of these
subjects must first make an attempt at mediation in accordance with the procedures laid down in Legislative Decree 28/10. 15
After some early resistance, a further law was passed in November 2021 to extend the scope of mandatory mediation as a pre-
litigation step to new categories of civil and commercial claims. 16
Italian law also allows judges to encourage parties to opt for mediation proceedings at any time during a dispute (Legislative
Decree 28/2010 art.2).
If parties are weighing up the pros and cons of whether to include a mediation clause, they would do well to consider that,
following the Italian legislation, according to a study by the Ministry of Justice in Italy, the average resolution rate in 2021 for
parties settling in mediation (commenced before institution of proceedings) was 45.8%. 17  This contrasts with the settlement
figures from the biennial CEDR UK mediation audit of 70–75% 18  but, nevertheless, is still significant.
In assessing whether a party’s refusal to mediate (or go to other non-binding dispute resolution methods) is unreasonable, there
are a number of English law cases that can be of assistance and may be helpful to parties considering if and how to include a
mediation clause in their contracts. The (non-exhaustive) factors include: 19
 
• the nature of the dispute;
 
• the merits of the case;
 
• the extent to which other settlement methods had been attempted;
 
• whether the costs of ADR would be disproportionately high;
 
• whether any delay in setting up and attending the ADR would have been prejudicial;
 
• whether the ADR had a reasonable prospect of success; and
 
• whether a party has refused to enter into ADR despite the court’s encouragement.
As a general principle, silence in the face of an invitation to participate in ADR is, of itself, unreasonable. This is regardless of
whether an outright refusal to participate might have been justified by the identification of otherwise reasonable grounds. 20
As a reminder of the importance of considering ADR, and therefore ensuring that contracts contain a mediation/ADR clause,
the words of Mr Justice Griffiths are worthy of note:

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
“The reasons given for refusing to engage in mediation were inadequate. They were, simply, and repeatedly, that
the Defendant ‘continues to believe that it has a strong defence’. No defence, however strong, by itself justifies a
failure to engage in any kind of alternative dispute resolution. Experience has shown that disputes may often be
resolved in a way satisfactory to all parties, including parties who find themselves able to resolve claims against
them which they consider not to be well founded. Settlement allows solutions which are potentially limitless in
their ingenuity and flexibility, and they do not necessarily require any admission of liability, or even a payment
of money. Even if they do involve payment of money, the amount may compare favourably (if the settlement is
timely) with the irrecoverable costs, in money terms alone, of an action that has been successfully fought. The
costs of an action will not always be limited to financial costs, however. A trial is likely to require a significant
expenditure of time, including management time, and may take a heavy toll on witnesses even for successful
parties which a settlement could spare them. As to admission of liability, a settlement can include admissions or
statements which fall short of accepting legal liability, which may still be of value to the party bringing a claim.
[…]” 21
The clause—overview
3-006
For a clause to be valid, one of the most important things is that it cannot contain wording to the effect that “the parties will
resolve their dispute by mediation”. This means that, if the parties do decide to include a mediation clause, the clause must
consider the possibility of failure to resolve the dispute and determine what follows. If it fails, mediation is typically followed
by an agreed form of binding determinative process – which can be any one of the binding stages considered in Part 3 (i.e.
expert determination, arbitration or litigation).
Despite having agreed to a mediation (or other ADR) clause during the negotiation of the contract, in the event of a dispute
arising, it is still possible that one party may attempt to start litigation proceedings (effectively ignoring the ADR clause). In this
event, the following principles are applicable where a party seeks to enforce an ADR provision by means of an order staying
proceedings: 22
 
(i)The agreement must create an enforceable obligation requiring the parties to engage in alternative dispute resolution.
 
(ii)The obligation to participate in alternative dispute resolution prior to litigation or arbitration must be mandatory. 23
 
(iii)The dispute resolution process to be followed does not have to be formal but must be sufficiently clear and certain
by reference to objective criteria, including machinery to appoint a mediator or determine any other necessary step in the
procedure without the requirement for any further agreement by the parties.
 
(iv)The court has a discretion to stay proceedings commenced in breach of an enforceable dispute resolution agreement.
In exercising its discretion, the court will have regard to the public policy interest in upholding the parties’ commercial
agreement and furthering the overriding objective in assisting the parties to resolve their disputes.
In drafting the clause, it is also important to be reminded that, in order for mediation to be effective, both parties must be prepared
to compromise. As a result, the people who attend the mediation must have a good understanding of the issues and must have
the authority and mandate to make concessions and to reach a resolution. It is impossible to reach a mediated settlement if one
(or both!) parties have no intention of settling or want their day in court.
In considering the inclusion of a mediation clause in a contract during the contract drafting stage, it can be helpful for both
parties to consider the nature of their business relationship and to test whether, if a material dispute did arise, their respective
organisations understand what mediation involves and what internal processes/approvals they might need to go through before
mediation is started. It is understood that disputes may arise as a result of unknown unknowns appearing out of the mist, but
it is much easier to have a proactive discussion about how such a clause would work before any disputes (and the resulting
tension) are present. This discussion should include consideration of mediating over an extended time period (as referenced

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
above) and any procedural steps that may be needed to assist the parties in preparing for mediation (exchange of information,
outlining of issues, early engagement with the mediator, etc).
Before drafting a mediation clause, depending on the type of business relationship between the parties, it can also make sense to
consider whether there are any types of dispute that the parties consider may not be suitable to resolve through mediation. 24  If
such types of dispute can be identified, it could be desirable to exclude them from being covered by the mediation clause. This
will avoid wasted time and the risks of an action by one party alleging that the other did not comply with the mediation clause.
With consent, parties can engage in mediation at any time. One of the primary objectives of a mediation clause is to stop the
parties pursuing litigation (or arbitration) whilst the clause is active and, ideally, until the mediation option has been exhausted.
Having said that, even with a contractual clause, it is not possible to force a party to engage positively and, if there is a significant
imbalance of power, or a cultural refusal to engage, then the only result of the clause will be to delay what, through the lens of
hindsight, will be seen as the inevitable binding process of arbitration or litigation.
A 2013 review indicated that the general expectations of agreeing to mediation are:
 
(a)the third-party mediator will be impartial, independent and competent;
 
(b)the process will be confidential;
 
(c)the aim of the mediation is to arrive at a settlement of all or part of the dispute; and
 
(d)the subsequent settlement will be concluded or at least evidenced in writing. 25
The clause—key elements
3-007
In common with other dispute resolution clauses, mediation clauses tend to come under the classification of being “midnight
clauses” in that they are often concluded (typically being copied and pasted) late in the drafting/completion process. 26  As an
indication of the nature of the challenge facing parties in giving a mediation clause the attention it deserves, a 2017 survey of
the perception of ADR practitioners reported that 65% of dispute resolution clauses are simply copied and pasted. 27  Given the
consequence of a clause being found to be invalid 28  or even simply not fit for purpose, proper consideration is necessary to
ensure that a clause satisfies the necessary criteria. 29
An effective clause must provide certainty as regards scope and process. In essence, the clause must address the following: 30
 
(a)the scope of the agreement (disputes covered);
 
(b)a description of the procedure to be followed by the parties including any pre-mediation steps such as disclosure of
information, issues papers or similar (often referred to as process design);
 
(c)procedure to select the mediator(s) and his or her payment;
 
(d)time frame for the mediation or timetable for compliance; and
 
(e)the obligation to refrain from acting (that is, initiating arbitration).
In addition to the “process” elements of the clause, given the potential for contract disputes to arise over elements of the main
contract, it is essential that any dispute resolution clause is separable such that it is not rendered void if the main contract is
found to be void for any reason. This means that, ideally, the parties’ agreement to submit any current or future disputes to
mediation should be recorded and isolated from any discussion about the validity of the main contract.
There are many template clauses available online and it would be impossible, and probably unhelpful, to try and list them all.
In addition, there are, of course, many clauses that end up in contracts that are produced by in-house lawyers and are not public.

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
A systematic content analysis of 172 such clauses was carried out in 2018–2019. 31  This showed that around 50% were two-
step clauses with a non-binding stage (mediation) leading to a binding stage (arbitration or litigation) and 33% called for a three-
step clause (negotiation, mediation, arbitration). This relatively high adoption rate confirms that the benefit of contractually
trying to encourage efforts to settle prior to entering into arbitration or litigation is widely accepted. As such, if a party wishes
to include such clauses in their contract they should persist and not be put off if the other party is resistant or simply does not
seem interested.
To illustrate the detail behind each clause and to allow for a comparison, a selection of mediation clauses is included in Appendix
Three. Whilst these have been taken from some of the more well-known institutions, the mere fact that they are included in
Appendix Three should not be seen as an endorsement or indication that other providers of such clauses, including individual
providers of mediation services, are in any way inferior. The reason for including them here is to allow for a real-life comparison
of the elements of a typical mediation clause and to distil out a clause that captures the key elements and options available
when drafting such a clause.
The institutions that are included in Appendix Three are:
 
American Arbitration Association (AAA)
 
Centre For Effective Dispute Resolution (CEDR)
 
Chartered Institute of Arbitration (CIArb)
 
Dubai International Arbitration Centre (DIAC)
 
International Centre for Dispute Resolution (ICDR)
 
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
 
London Chamber of Arbitration and Mediation (LCAM)
 
London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA)
 
Singapore International Mediation Centre (SIMC)
Mediation clause: trigger
3-008
The primary operative part of a mediation clause is to determine if, when, and how a mediation clause is activated. The structure
of this part appears simple and boils down to stating that, if a dispute arises, it must be referred to mediation. However, there
are a number of important “invisible” issues that need to be considered in order to ensure that the clause is effective and meets
the needs of both parties.
A common feature of the standard clauses is that, to provide the necessary certainty, these institutional clauses universally refer
to running the mediation according to their own procedures and do not require the procedures themselves to be included in
the contract between the parties. In contrast, DIAC and LCIA actually deem that their procedures are incorporated into the
contractual clause.
It is not the purpose of this book to go through the differences in mediation procedures between the institutions, but it should
be clear that any reference to the procedures (or administration) by a third-party institution should not be put into a contract
unless the parties are clear what these procedures mean.
Some institutions (e.g. AAA) go further in their clauses by stating that the mediation will be actually administered (rather than
just the appointment of a mediator) by the institution. It is clear that this obligation should not slip into a mediation clause
without knowing what this means in terms of cost, appointment of mediators, venue, etc.

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
Illustrative clauses
3-009
By way of comparative illustration, examples of institutional clauses are:
AAA: “If a dispute arises out of or relates to this contract, or the breach thereof, and if the dispute cannot
be settled through negotiation, the parties agree first to try in good faith to settle the dispute by mediation
administered by the American Arbitration Association under its Commercial Mediation Procedures.”
CEDR: “If any dispute arises in connection with this agreement, the parties agree to enter into mediation in
good faith to settle such a dispute and will do so in accordance with the CEDR Model Mediation Procedure.”
DIAC: “In the event of a dispute arising out of or relating to this contract, including any question regarding its
existence, validity or termination, the parties shall seek settlement of that dispute by mediation in accordance
with the Mediation Rules of the Dubai International Arbitration Centre, which Rules are deemed to be
incorporated by reference into this clause.”
ICC: “In the event of any dispute arising out of or in connection with the present contract, the parties shall
first refer the dispute to proceedings under the ICC Mediation Rules.” 32
ICDR: “In the event of any controversy or claim arising out of or relating to this contract, or a breach thereof,
the parties hereto agree first to try and settle the dispute by mediation, administered by the International
Centre for Dispute Resolution under its Mediation Rules, before resorting to arbitration, litigation or some
other dispute resolution procedure.”
LCAM: “Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or in connection with this agreement, or the
existence, breach, termination or invalidity thereof shall be determined by mediation in accordance with the
London Chamber of Arbitration and Mediation (“LCAM”) Model Mediation Procedures.”
LCIA: “In the event of a dispute arising out of or relating to this contract, including any question regarding its
existence, validity or termination, the parties shall seek settlement of that dispute by mediation in accordance
with the LCIA Mediation Rules, which Rules are deemed to be incorporated by reference into this clause.”

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
SIMC: “All disputes, controversies or differences arising out of or in connection with this contract, including
any question regarding its existence, validity or termination, shall before or after the commencement of any
other proceedings, be first referred to mediation in Singapore at the Singapore International Mediation Centre
in accordance with its Mediation Rules for the time being in force.”
Born (author):
(This is an extract from an authoritative book 33  to illustrate the contrast between a fully considered clause with
one that might have been simplified by an institution for ease of use)
“The parties shall attempt to resolve any dispute arising out of or relating to this [Agreement] [Contract]
promptly by negotiation [ ].
[Mediation (B): If the dispute has not been resolved by negotiation as provided herein within [45] days after
delivery of the initial notice of negotiation, [or if the parties failed to meet within [20] days,] the parties
shall endeavour to settle the dispute by mediation under the International Institute for Conflict Prevention &
Resolution (“CPR”) Mediation Procedure [currently in effect OR in effect on the date of this Agreement],
[provided, however, that if one party fails to participate in the negotiation as provided herein, the other party
can initiate mediation prior to the expiration of the [45] days.] Unless otherwise agreed, the parties will select
a mediator from the CPR Panels of Distinguished Neutrals.”
“Hidden” issues
Scope
3-010
All of the clauses have a broad definition of the trigger (“If a dispute arises…” “In the event of a dispute…” “All disputes,
controversies or differences…” “Any dispute, controversy or claim…”). The immediate potential problem with this is that
there is no materiality threshold or restriction to the type of dispute. It is unlikely to have been intended but, without thinking,
these clauses would technically catch anything from a dispute over an unpaid invoice, a delay in delivery, damage to a product,
personal injury, through to breach of a condition or termination of an agreement. Whilst it is logical that the parties will not
address a trivial dispute through the full process, this ambiguity could become an issue when the level of materiality has a
different significance to the “injured” party compared to the other.
Whilst the parties could rely on both being reasonable and it being in no-one’s interest to require mediation for a minor
dispute, in court, the clause would be interpreted as it is written, i.e. every dispute. If it is found to be too difficult to narrow
the scope, then the parties could go ahead with such clauses, but they need to do this with their eyes open. In the alternative,
they could exclude certain areas of dispute (for example, disputed invoices, damage to products) or put in some form of
materiality threshold.

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
Certainty
3-011
It is essential that any reference in the clause to a recognised model mediation procedure should provide certainty: 34
The reference to institutional procedures will provide clear guidelines on the conduct of the mediation
and could specify the nature of relevant disputes as well as the appointment of a mediator. In order to
avoid secondary litigation, the parties need to review any third-party procedures and confirm that they
understand what they involve.
Timing and venue
3-012
In order to avoid delays and facilitate the benefits offered by mediation as being a quicker solution than arbitration or litigation,
this wording should address the question of timing and specify the number of days from an effective notice of mediation to
having the mediation itself (or if the mediation is going to be conducted over time, when the mediation needs to be completed).
Given the consequence of getting things wrong if such clauses or requirements are drafted ad hoc, this is one of the benefits
of consciously selecting the procedures of a local institution to follow.
When deciding on the logistics arrangements of the mediation, if the parties select institutional guidelines, these are also
likely to include important factors such as choice of venue (including location), date of the mediation (relative to the trigger),
start time, and deadlines for documentary disclosure.
Event of failure
3-013
Unless it is expressly specified, there is nothing in a typical mediation clause that prevents the issuance of court proceedings.
As such, given the objective of the parties trying to avoid uncontrolled escalation to litigation or arbitration, it is recommended
that the wording be reviewed to ensure that it is both mandatory and exclusive, i.e. a binding process cannot start until a
certain effort or number of days have been spent with mediation.
Similarly, if the parties wish to retain the ability to resort to court proceedings/arbitration whilst mediating, they should
express this consciously rather than allow the right to slip in by default.
Potential issues
Willingness to compromise
3-014
The biggest issue is not related to the wording of the clause but the willingness of both parties to compromise to resolve their
dispute. Given the non-binding nature of mediation it is inevitable that, if one party is unwilling to compromise and reluctant
to engage with the objectives of the mediation process, then mediation is certain to fail.

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
If a party is unwilling to engage, it is likely to become apparent quite quickly and, in this event, the party, who is willing to
participate, may suggest that the parties agree to halt the mediation process and go to arbitration or litigation in advance of
the expiry of a mediation phase that was incorporated in the agreement.
If this is done by consent, then such a decision should not compromise the agreement. The essential factor here is that it
must be by consent, otherwise the other party could use a failed mediation process to try and halt the litigation/arbitration
for failure to comply with the mediation clause.
An unwillingness to compromise is quite common when there is a significant power imbalance between the parties (there is
typically a power imbalance of some form between the parties to a dispute). This power imbalance can also give rise to the
weaker party feeling disadvantaged or pressured to settle and, in turn, this could affect the fairness of any mediated outcome.
The involvement of a good independent mediator should reduce this pressure by communicating the stronger party’s position
in a neutral manner, but the pressure is there.
Ultimately, the weaker party would have to assess whether accepting an offer put to them during mediation is likely to be better
or worse than going to a final binding stage. This is easier said than done but, if the stronger party refuses to compromise,
the weaker party should, in principle, not be worse off having included a mediation clause as, in any event, the alternative
would have been litigation or arbitration.
Non-compliance
3-015
It is also possible that a party may appear to have engaged with mediation but, they may fail to follow the process that has been
agreed and, as a result, will cause delays and complications. Symptoms of non-compliance can also include a breakdown of
communication. The fall-back here is that, if one party refuses to engage, the binding stage will still eventually be triggered.
Choice of mediator
3-016
The choice of mediator is critical to the success of a mediation. The critical characteristics of an effective mediator can be
broadly described under the headings of personality and skills/technique. A good mediator will be empathetic, culturally
aware, patient, flexible, adaptable and, above all, trustworthy. They should also possess good communication skills with a
highly developed ability to actively listen. The mediator should be able to deploy these characteristics to build confidence
and encourage open communication.
A legal knowledge may be helpful if the dispute is legally complex but problem-solving skills are more important. Here, the
mediator should be able to identify underlying issues and to distil the parties’ respective true positions and, ideally, bottom
lines. They should also be able to explore creative solutions and to be able to guide the parties towards a resolution.
In choosing a good mediator, their training and experience can be a useful indicator of their capability. The more mediations
that a mediator has under their belt, the more likely it is that they have gained their work through being effective and being
recommended. Having said that, it should be recognised that a young inexperienced mediator may be just as effective as they
are more likely to have had more recent training and not slipped into any bad habits as well as being motivated to put extra
effort into the mediation to try and prove their capability.
If the dispute relates to a specific area (e.g. shipping, construction, energy, shareholders) then experience of the relevant area
may be more important than a simple count of how many mediations they have conducted.
Having checked that there is no conflict of interest, taking references (which can be provided to both parties) can also help
select a mediator. In any event, the selection has to be agreed between the parties. There are a number of ways of doing
this including specifying that one party produces a list of mediators (typically three but sometimes five) and the other party
makes a selection from that list.

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
One of the benefits of appointing a mediator versus, for example, appointing an arbitrator, is that the parties and their advisers
can engage with the mediator on a confidential basis to discuss the dispute and how the mediator might approach the mediation
process. This is a helpful way for parties and their advisers to gain confidence when using a mediator for the first time.
The mediator candidate clearly needs to be alert to perceptions of bias (if they only meet with one party) and the inevitable
attempts by a party to attempt to persuade the mediator of the virtues of their case at an early stage. That is inevitable and
experienced mediators are alive to the issue and avoid it whilst still being able to build trust and confidence.
Given the complexity of the parties choosing the mediator, if they cannot agree, the most common way of selecting one is
to ask the most relevant national institution to select a mediator from their panel. This option can also be specified in the
mediation agreement.
The most important criterion for success is the willingness of the parties to compromise and, as such, whilst important, the
choice of a mediator who is competent but not experienced may not be fatal.
Footnotes
1
CEDR, Tenth Mediation Audit. A survey of commercial mediator attitudes and experience in the United Kingdom (1
February 2023), p.7; CEDR, The Sixth Mediation Audit. A survey of commercial mediator attitudes and experience
(22 May 2014).
2
CEDR Asia Pacific, “CEDR Asia Pacific and CEDR London track record”, http://www.cedr-asia-pacific.com/cedr/
solve/record/.
3
CEDR, Model Mediation Procedure (2022) https://www.cedr.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/CEDR-Model-
Mediation-Procedure-May-22.pdf.
4
Leonard L. Riskin, “Understanding Mediators’ Orientations, Strategies, and Techniques: A Grid for the
Perplexed” (1996) 1 Harvard Negotiation Law Review 7 45.
5
Martin Brink, “Evaluative Mediation (Part I), an Analysis” (2021) Corporate Mediation Journal 12.
6
Bruce McKinney, “A Critical Analysis of Transformative Mediation” (1997) 29(1) Peace Research 41.
7
Charlie Irvine, “Transformative Mediation: A Critique” (2007) SSRN Electronic Journal, 10.2139/ssrn.1691847.
8
Joseph Folger and Robert Bush, “Transformative Mediation: A Self-Assessment” (2014) 2(1) International Journal of
Conflict Engagement and Resolution 20.
9
Burgess v Penny [2019] EWHC 2034 (Ch); [2019] Costs L.R. 1453 at [15], per Catherine Newman QC.
10
Lawrence Freedman and Larry Ray, State Legislation on Dispute Resolution (American Bar Association, 1982), NCJRS
Number 89152. This report presents the substance and current status of legislation in 14 states dealing with mediation,
arbitration, and conciliation.
11
Halsey v Milton Keynes General NHS Trust [2004] EWCA Civ 576; [2004] 1 W.L.R. 3002.
12
Churchill v Merthyr Tydfil CBC [2023] EWCA Civ 1416; [2024] Costs L.R. 249 at [74(ii)], per Sir Geoffrey Vos.
13
Directive 2008/52 on certain aspects of mediation in civil and commercial matters (The EU Mediation Directive) [2008]
OJ L136/3.
14
LD 28/2010, Legislative Decree 28 of 4 March 2010 implementing Article 60 of Law 69 of 18 June 2009 on mediation
aimed at the settlement of civil and commercial disputes (Legislative Degree 28/2010), Official Gazette, No.53 of 5
March 2010, introduced the Italian mediation model, providing for mandatory mediation before hearings for certain
types of dispute.
15
European Parliament, Directorate-General for Internal Policies, Policy Department C, Italian Legislation on Mediation
(April 2011), PE 453.175.
16
Italian Parliament passed Law no. 206/2021 in November 2021. This Act extended the scope of mandatory mediation
as a pre-litigation step to new categories of civil and commercial claims.
17
Mediations in Italy: Overview (November 2022), Practical Law UK Practice Note, Overview w-036-9298.
18
CEDR, Tenth Mediation Audit. A survey of commercial mediator attitudes and experience in the United Kingdom
(2023), p.7.
19
Halsey v Milton Keynes General NHS Trust [2004] EWCA Civ 576; [2004] 1 W.L.R. 3002.
20
PGF II SA v OMFS Co 1 Ltd [2013] EWCA Civ 1288; [2014] 1 W.L.R. 1386 and Thakkar v Patel [2017] EWCA Civ
117; [2017] 2 Costs L.R. 233.

Chapter 3 - Mediation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291543 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
21
DSN v Blackpool Football Club Ltd [2020] EWHC 670 (QB); [2020] Costs L.R. 359 at [28], per Griffiths J.
22
Ohpen Operations UK Ltd v Invesco Fund Managers Ltd [2019] EWHC 2246 (TCC); [2019] B.L.R. 576 at [32], per
O’Farrell J.
23
Children’s Ark Partnerships Ltd v Kajima Construction Europe (UK) Ltd [2022] EWHC 1595 (TCC); 203 Con. L.R.
91 at [48], per Smith J—the requirement for a “condition precedent” (per Ohpen) was replaced by a requirement that
the relevant ADR step be a “mandatory obligation”.
24
Halsey v Milton Keynes General NHS Trust [2004] EWCA Civ 576; [2004] 1 W.L.R. 3002.
25
Neil Andrews, Andrews on Civil Processes: Arbitration and Mediation (Cambridge, UK: Intersentia, 2013), para.2.28.
26
Ewelina Kajkowska, Enforceability of Multi-Tiered Dispute Resolution Clauses (Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2017), p.223.
27
Maryam Salehijam, “ADR Clauses and International Perceptions: A Preliminary Report” (2017) 21(3) Nederlands-
Vlaams tijdschrift voor Mediation en conflictmanagement 27.
28
Maryam Salehijam, “Mediation Clause Decoded: A Systematic Content Analysis” (2018–2019) 5(6) McGill Journal
of Dispute Resolution 120.
29
Michael Pryles, “Multi-Tiered Dispute Resolution Clauses” (2001) 18(2) J. Int’l Arb. 159, 160.
30
Maryam Salehijam “Mediation Clauses: Enforceability and Impact” (2019) 31 Singapore Academy of Law Journal 598;
Elizabeth Bay Development Pty Ltd v Bora/Building Services Pty Ltd (1995) 36 NSWLR 709; Hooper Bailie Associated
Ltd v Natcon Group Pty Ltd (1992) 28 NSWLR 194 and Chinadotcom Corp v Hugh Morrow [2001] NSWSC 209.
31
Maryam Salehijam, “Mediation Clause Decoded: A Systematic Content Analysis” (2018–2019) 5(6) McGill Journal of
Dispute Resolution 120, 136, “E. Composition of the Mediation Agrements”.
32
© International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). Reproduced with kind permission of ICC.
33
G.B. Born, International Arbitration and Forum Selection Agreements, Drafting and Enforcing, 6th edn (Kluwer Law
International B.V., 2021), Ch.3 Drafting International Arbitration Agreements, “B Potentially Desirable Elements of
International Arbitration Agreements”, “B9 Multi-Tiered Dispute Resolution Clauses”, p.137.
34
Cable & Wireless Plc v IBM United Kingdom Ltd [2002] EWHC 2059 (Comm); [2002] C.L.C. 1319.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
