Section E. - Ad hoc Arbitration and Institutional Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638602...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section E. - Ad hoc Arbitration and Institutional Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Section E. - Ad hoc Arbitration and Institutional Arbitration
1. 150
There are broadly two types of international arbitration. The first is an ad hoc arbitration, the second is an institutional arbitration.
1. 151
Any arbitration, wherever it is conducted, is subject to the mandatory rules of the lex arbitri: that is, the law of the place of
arbitration. Generally, these rules will be broad and non-specific. They will say, for instance, that the parties must be treated
with equality, 127  but they will not set out the way in which this is to be achieved. For this, more specific rules will be required.
Here, the parties have a choice. Should the arbitration be conducted ad hoc, that is, pursuant to a set of rules agreed between
the parties without the involvement of an arbitral institution, or should it be conducted according to the rules of one of the
established arbitral institutions?
(a) Ad hoc arbitration
1. 152
Parties to an ad hoc arbitration may establish their own rules of procedure (so long as these rules treat the parties fairly and
allow each party a reasonable opportunity to present its case). 128  Alternatively, the parties may agree that the arbitration will
be conducted without involving an arbitral institution, but according to an established set of rules, such as the UNCITRAL
Rules. These provide a tried and tested framework for the proceedings, to which the tribunal and the parties may of course add
other provisions, if they so wish.
1. 153
In practice, ad hoc arbitrations are now almost universally conducted on the basis of the UNCITRAL Rules, which the parties
agree to accept as a convenient and up-to-date set of rules. 129  States in particular are likely to regard the UNCITRAL Rules as a
preferred option, since they do not derive their authority from an arbitral organisation based in a particular country or designed
to serve the interests of commerce, but from a broad international consensus reflected in a set of rules designed and adapted
under the auspices of the United Nations.
1. 154
The principal disadvantage of ad hoc arbitration is that it depends for its full effectiveness on cooperation between the parties and
their lawyers, supported by an adequate legal system in the place of arbitration. It is not difficult to delay arbitral proceedings,
for example by refusing at the outset to appoint an arbitrator with the consequence that there is no arbitral tribunal in existence
and no agreed book of rules to say what is to be done. 130  It will then be necessary to rely on such provisions of law as may
be available to offer the necessary support. 131  It is only when an arbitral tribunal is in existence and a set of rules has been
established that an ad hoc arbitration will be able to proceed if one of the parties fails or refuses to play its part in the proceedings.
This is one of the reasons why UNCITRAL arbitration is often seen as the best of both worlds: in addition to dispensing with the
services of arbitral institutions (which state parties sometimes prefer), the UNCITRAL Rules (by providing for the designation
of an appointing authority to constitute the arbitral tribunal) prevent a reluctant respondent from blocking the proceedings by
refusing to take part in the appointment of a tribunal.

Section E. - Ad hoc Arbitration and Institutional Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638602...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
(b) Institutional arbitration
1. 155
An ‘institutional’ arbitration is one that is administered by a specialist arbitral institution under its own rules of arbitration.
These rules cover the progress of the arbitration from commencement to final award, but with differences of approach and
emphasis. Some rules reflect the influence of the civil law, whereas others derive greater inspiration from the common law.
What is common to all sets of rules is that they are formulated specifically for arbitrations that are to be administered by the
institution concerned; and they are usually incorporated into the main contract between the parties by means of an arbitration
clause. The clause recommended by the LCIA, for instance, states:
Any dispute arising out of or in connection with this contract, including any question regarding its existence,
validity or termination, shall be referred to and finally resolved by arbitration under the LCIA Rules, which Rules
are deemed to be incorporated into this clause. 132
1. 156
An arbitration clause is a convenient way of incorporating a set of broad procedural rules, as well as an institution to police
the process, into the parties’ contract. If at some future date the defending party or parties are unwilling to go ahead with an
arbitration, it will nevertheless be possible for the claimant to do so effectively, since there will be a set of rules and an institution
to regulate the way in which the arbitral tribunal is to be appointed and the way in which the arbitration is to be conducted
and carried through to its conclusion.
(i) Advantages
1. 157
Rules laid down by the established arbitral institutions will usually have been proven to work effectively in practice. They
also will generally have undergone periodic revision in consultation with experienced practitioners, to take account of new
developments in the law and practice of international arbitration. The rules themselves are generally set out in a small booklet
and parties who agree to submit any dispute to arbitration in accordance with the rules of a named institution effectively
incorporate that institution’s ‘rulebook’ into their arbitration agreement.
1. 158
This automatic incorporation of an established ‘rulebook’ is one of the principal advantages of institutional arbitration. If,
for example, there is a challenge to an arbitrator on the grounds of lack of independence or impartiality, or if the defending
party is unwilling to arbitrate and fails to appoint an arbitrator, the rulebook will provide a solution to enable the arbitration
to proceed and for an award to be issued.
1. 159
A further advantage of institutional arbitration is that most arbitral institutions provide specialist staff to administer the
arbitration. They will ensure that the arbitral tribunal is appointed, that advance payments are made in respect of the fees and
expenses of the arbitrators, that time limits are observed, and generally that the arbitration is run as smoothly as possible.
1. 160
Finally, the assistance that an arbitral institution can give to the parties and their counsel in the course of the arbitral
proceedings is appreciable. Even lawyers who are experienced in the conduct of arbitrations may run into problems that they
may find it useful to discuss with the institution’s secretariat.

Section E. - Ad hoc Arbitration and Institutional Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638602...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
(ii) Disadvantages
1. 161
There are two principal disadvantages of institutional arbitration as opposed to ad hoc arbitration. First, there are the fees of
the arbitral institution which will add, sometimes considerably, to the cost of the proceedings. Secondly, there is an additional
tier of ‘management’ of the proceedings, in the shape of the staff of the arbitral institution. Experienced counsel and arbitrators
may regard this as unnecessary. However, since the tasks performed by the staff of the institution usually need to be performed
in any event, and in the absence of an institution would need to be performed by the tribunal itself (or by the tribunal’s
secretary, if there is one), excluding an institution may prove to be a false economy.
(iii) Selecting an arbitral institution
1. 162
In recent years, arbitral institutions have moved to centre-stage in the world of international arbitration. Their continued
proliferation indicates an increasing demand for the services they offer, although some fall by the wayside. The best of them
will offer a full range of services. First, they will have rules of arbitration, which have either been tested over time and proved
to work effectively or which are based on a recognised and trusted model, such as the UNCITRAL Rules. This will save the
parties and their lawyers the time and money that would otherwise be spent, as in non-institutional (or ad hoc) arbitrations,
in drawing up a tailor-made set of rules.
1. 163
Secondly, if the parties are unable to agree upon a sole arbitrator, or upon the presiding arbitrator of a three-member tribunal,
the selection of a suitably qualified individual will be made by the arbitral institution itself. Thirdly, if an arbitrator is
challenged for lack of independence or impartiality, that challenge will not be determined by the court at the place of arbitration
but by the arbitral institution itself, exercising a quasi-judicial role. Fourthly, once the arbitration is under way, the institution’s
secretariat will usually monitor its progress and deal with any enquiries that the parties or the tribunal may have.
1. 164
Finally, at the end of the arbitral proceedings, and when the award is ready to be issued, it may be reviewed by the arbitral
institution, who will refer back to the arbitrators with any minor corrections; and once the award has been signed and dated by
the tribunal, it will usually be issued to the parties by that institution. It may even be referred to by the name of the institution,
being described in the arbitration journals and reviews as, for instance, an ‘ICC Award’. Nevertheless, it is and remains the
award of the arbitral tribunal and not of the institution that issues it.
1. 165
There are so many arbitral institutions or centres in the world that it is not practicable, nor would it be useful, simply to list
them all in this book. We therefore propose to assist in the selection of the ‘right’ arbitral institution for a particular case by
setting out some general considerations that might be helpful.
(c) General considerations
1. 166
First, if the arbitral institution is relatively new or unknown, steps should be taken to ensure (i) that it is a genuine arbitral
institution and (ii) that it has credible premises with staff who are suitably qualified to offer the services that are advertised. As to
the first point, although it seems unlikely, fraudulent arbitral institutions are not unknown. For instance, customers of Citibank
who had a complaint about credit card debts were invited to submit that complaint to arbitration under the rules of the National
Arbitration Council (NAC). Those who did so received an ‘award’ for the amount of their debt, plus the fee of the NAC. It
was not a genuine operation and Citibank eventually obtained an injunction to stop it happening. 133  As to the second point, the

Section E. - Ad hoc Arbitration and Institutional Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638602...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
staff of a good arbitral institution should be capable of giving advice on potentially sensitive matters, such as the appointment
or challenge of arbitrators, unreasonable delay in the conduct of the proceedings, extension of time limits, and so forth.
1. 167
Secondly, it is necessary to make a distinction between ‘arbitral institutions’ and ‘arbitration centres’. The titles may cause some
confusion. An arbitral institution, properly so called, will administer arbitrations, either under its own rules or under established
rules such as those of UNCITRAL. An arbitration centre may in fact be an arbitral institution, like the Cairo Regional Centre
for International Commercial Arbitration (CRCICA), which administers arbitrations under a slightly modified version of the
UNCITRAL Rules. Alternatively, an arbitration centre may in fact be a business enterprise such as the International Dispute
Resolution Centre (IDRC) in London, which offers ‘high-tech’ facilities for arbitrations, mediations, and conferences but does
not itself administer arbitrations.
1. 168
Thirdly, there is the question of location. Regional arbitral institutions have grown in importance and it is now possible to look
for a reputable regional institution, rather than one based in Europe or the United States. For example, if the parties are based in
Africa, consideration should certainly be given to the selection of one of the institutions or centres that are based there. 134  Some
institutions that have started regionally now operate internationally. One example is the Singapore International Arbitration
Centre which now has representative offices in India, Korea, the United States, and China.
1. 169
Finally, there is the question of the quality of the arbitrators appointed and the awards rendered under the rules of a given
institution. Arbitral institutions compete on accessibility, price, speed of service, and other factors, but the quality of the tribunal
should also be taken into account. The way an arbitral institution selects arbitrators is thus a very important factor.
1. 170
A good award, made by a tribunal of quality under the auspices of a reputable arbitral institution, should be capable of standing
up to most challenges. An award is, of course, the award of the tribunal and not of the arbitral institution, but it nevertheless
carries to a greater or lesser extent the imprimatur of that institution. This raises the question of the extent to which an arbitral
institution should review an award before it is issued to the parties (and the rules should be reviewed with that question in mind.)
1. 171
At one time, it was assumed that parties would comply voluntarily with international arbitral awards, however reluctant they
might be to do so. This is no longer the position, as indicated in Chapters 11 and 12. Attempts to challenge (or ‘set-aside’)
international awards at the place of arbitration, and actions in foreign courts to try to enforce such awards, are becoming
noticeably more frequent as the amounts in dispute grow larger.
(d) Selection of arbitrators by the institution
1. 172
The qualities required of international arbitrators are considered in Chapter 4 of this book. In the present context, the focus is
simply on the selection of arbitrators by an arbitral institution. The ideal situation is no doubt one in which the parties themselves
agree on the selection of the arbitrator or arbitrators who are to constitute the arbitral tribunal. However, if the parties cannot
agree, it will be for the court or if there is one, the relevant arbitral institution, to make the necessary selection.
1. 173
In circumstances in which an arbitral institution may be required to select one or more arbitrators for a particular arbitration, it
is important to know what method of selection that institution uses. Does it have a list of favourite arbitrators that it appoints in
turn, in a contemporary version of ‘Hobson’s Choice’? 135  Or does it employ a list system on the lines of that in the UNCITRAL
Rules, where parties are given a list of possible arbitrators from which they are invited to choose? If so, what are the criteria
for inclusion on that list and how often is it revised? Or again, is the choice referred to a committee and, if so, who are the
members of that committee and what selection criteria do they use? In effect, is there a genuine list of diverse, skilled, and

Section E. - Ad hoc Arbitration and Institutional Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638602...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
effective arbitrators or is it a members’ club? In general terms, the choice of arbitrators will depend heavily on the nature of the
dispute and the skills required to resolve it and so any list system may unnecessarily constrain that choice.
1. 174
It is not always easy to find the answer to questions on how an institution selects arbitrators for its panel, even by a careful
scrutiny of its rules and any accompanying publicity. In an age in which increasing importance is attached to ‘transparency’,
it would be helpful if the answers were more readily available. If parties are to have confidence in arbitrators appointed by an
institution on their behalf, it is only right that they should know on what basis those arbitrators are selected.
(e) Costs
1. 175
An arbitral institution, like any business in the service sector, will charge fees in order to cover its own costs and expenses and,
in the case of some institutions, to make a profit that it will pass on to its parent company or owners. There are in general two
bases on which these fees are calculated.
1. 176
They may be calculated ad valorem, which is to say as a set proportion of the amount in dispute; or they may be calculated on
the basis of time spent on the arbitration by the staff of the institution and the tribunal. The parties to the arbitration will then be
required to make an advance payment, based either on the amount in dispute or on an estimate of the time likely to be spent on
the case. These payments will add to the overall costs of the arbitral proceedings, sometimes quite substantially, and the parties
and their lawyers will want to know that they are receiving value for money.
1. 177
The advantage of the ad valorem approach is that it means that the parties know from the outset what the arbitration is going
to cost, in terms of payments to the tribunal and the institution concerned (although further advances on account of costs may
be required if the arbitration turns out to take longer than expected—for example, because of the need for an interim award
on jurisdiction). The advantage of the time/cost method, which is the method generally used by professional firms such as
accountants and lawyers, is that there is a correlation between the work done (or at least, the time recorded as being spent)
and the fees charged.
Footnotes
127
See, e.g., the Model Law, Art. 18.
128
Many important arbitrations, e.g. reinsurance disputes under the so-called Bermuda Form, are regularly conducted ad
hoc.
129
It is not advisable to try to adopt or adapt institutional rules (such as those of the ICC) for use in an ad hoc arbitration,
since such rules make repeated references to the institution concerned and are unlikely to work properly or effectively
without it. It seems however (although it is not a practice that the authors would recommend) that it may be possible
to involve two arbitral institutions in what would otherwise be an ad hoc arbitration (although quite why this should
be done is another matter). The court in Singapore was faced with an arbitration clause stating that disputes should be
resolved by arbitration before SIAC in accordance with the ICC Rules. The Singapore International Arbitration Centre
was prepared to administer the arbitration under its rules, applying the ICC Rules to the ‘essential features the parties
would like to see’ and the arbitration proceeded on this basis. The Singapore court upheld this arrangement: see Insigma
Technology Co. Ltd v Alstom Technology Ltd [2008] SGHC 134, at 26. For its part, the ICC Court is unwilling to
administer proceedings fundamentally different from its own basic concepts: see Craig, Park, and Paulsson, International
Chamber of Commerce Arbitration (3rd edn, Oceana, 2000), para. 715.
130
Unless it has already been agreed that the UNCITRAL Rules are to govern the proceedings.
131
See Chapter 3.

Section E. - Ad hoc Arbitration and Institutional Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638602...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
132
The parties may go on, if they wish, to specify the number of arbitrations, the seat of the arbitration, the language to be
used, and the governing law of the contract and it would usually be sensible to do this.
133
See Rau, ‘Arbitral Jurisdiction and the Dimensions of “Consent” ’ (2008) 24 Arb Intl 204 at fn. 19.
134
See the ‘2020 SOAS Arbitration in Africa Survey Report’ by the School of Oriental and African Studies, University
of London.
135
T. Hobson (1544–1631) owned livery stables in Cambridge, the English university town. He hired out horses to students
and visitors in strict order, giving customers the option to take the horse they were offered or none at all.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
