Article 29 Emergency Arbitrator, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407020 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 29 Emergency Arbitrator
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Article 29 Emergency Arbitrator
1.
A party that needs urgent interim or conservatory measures that cannot await the constitution of an arbitral tribunal
(“Emergency Measures”) may make an application for such measures pursuant to the Emergency Arbitrator Rules in
Appendix V. Any such application shall be accepted only if it is received by the Secretariat prior to the transmission of the
file to the arbitral tribunal pursuant to Article 16 and irrespective of whether the party making the application has already
submitted its Request for Arbitration.
2.
The emergency arbitrator’s decision shall take the form of an order. The parties undertake to comply with any order made
by the emergency arbitrator.
3.
The emergency arbitrator’s order shall not bind the arbitral tribunal with respect to any question, issue or dispute determined
in the order. The arbitral tribunal may modify, terminate or annul the order or any modification thereto made by the
emergency arbitrator.
4.
The arbitral tribunal shall decide upon any party’s requests or claims related to the emergency arbitrator proceedings,
including the reallocation of the costs of such proceedings and any claims arising out of or in connection with the
compliance or non-compliance with the order.
5.
Articles 29(1)–29(4) and the Emergency Arbitrator Rules set forth in Appendix V (collectively the “Emergency Arbitrator
Provisions”) shall apply only to parties that are either signatories of the arbitration agreement under the Rules that is relied
upon for the application or successors to such signatories.
6.
The Emergency Arbitrator Provisions shall not apply if:
 
a) the arbitration agreement under the Rules was concluded before 1 January 2012;
 
b) the parties have agreed to opt out of the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions; or
 
c) the arbitration agreement upon which the application is based arises from a treaty.
7.
The Emergency Arbitrator Provisions are not intended to prevent any party from seeking urgent interim or conservatory
measures from a competent judicial authority at any time prior to making an application for such measures, and in

Article 29 Emergency Arbitrator, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407020 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
appropriate circumstances even thereafter, pursuant to the Rules. Any application for such measures from a competent
judicial authority shall not be deemed to be an infringement or a waiver of the arbitration agreement. Any such application
and any measures taken by the judicial authority must be notified without delay to the Secretariat.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
