Suspension due to other proceedings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406877 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Suspension due to other proceedings
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Suspension due to other proceedings
22-22
One issue with ICC proceedings is the pendency of other relevant proceedings. For example, in some cases, resolution of a
dispute (or assessment of damages) may depend on the validity of a patent and there may be proceedings pending with respect
to the validity of a patent. In other instances, there may be state proceedings pending as to the validity of a tax that may affect
the calculation of damages, or even a criminal proceeding that may have an impact on the resolution of the dispute that is to
be adjudicated. Last, but not less important, another reason why arbitrators decide to stay a set of proceedings while others
are pending is to avoid conflicting results, contradictory awards, and ultimately a waste of financial resources and the threat
of future connected litigation. 195
22-23
In each case, the Tribunal’s approach must take into account any agreement between the parties. In the absence of such an
agreement, the Tribunal has to weigh the various factors involved before it decides whether it is appropriate to suspend the
procedure. It will normally do so by way of a Procedural Order, which it may revisit at any time, depending on any new
developments. Since the situations are quite different, set out below is a discussion of parallel proceedings in general, then a
discussion of pending criminal actions and finally a discussion of anti-arbitration injunctions.
Footnotes
195
In the ICC Case No.12510, the Arbitral Tribunal dismissed a request for consolidation and instead ordered a stay of the
proceedings when the same commercial transaction between the same parties was being discussed by two ICC Tribunals,
and many facts were very similar. The Tribunal’s decision was prompted by the concern of avoiding potentially
conflicting results, as follows: “This need to avoid possible inconsistencies and to try to prevent future problems is
paramount to this Tribunal, which distinctively understands that its mission is, to the fullest extent possible, to render
rulings that decide the disputes submitted by the Parties, without giving room for further litigation thereof” (emphasis
in original). [2010] ICC ICArb. Bull., Supplement “Decisions on ICC Arbitration Procedure”, pp.59 and 61.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
