Rules of law applicable to the merits of the dispute, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407007 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Rules of law applicable to the merits of the dispute
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Rules of law applicable to the merits of the dispute
21-3
The reference in art.21(1) to the “rules of law” rather than to “the law” of a given country is a deliberate choice made in 1998
to signal that the parties or Tribunals were not restricted to the application of a country’s national legal system. The parties
might agree on free-standing legal rules, such as the principles of lex mercatoria, the UNIDROIT Principles of International
Commercial Contracts, or a combination of national laws. 111
21-4
Article 21(1) refers the law governing the merits of the dispute. The merits of the dispute relate to the adjudication of the
claims of the parties. As mentioned above, art.21(1) does not deal with the law applicable to the arbitration agreement or the
procedure discussed in arts 6 and 19 respectively. Various issues arise as to the distinction in particular between the merits of
the dispute and the procedure. These issues relate in particular to the issue of: (i) limitation or prescription periods; 112  (ii) legal
privilege; 113  and (iii) interest 114  which are generally beyond the scope of this Handbook.
21-5
Most ICC arbitrations are based on contract and the merits of the dispute include disputes as to claims under the relevant
contract. In some arbitrations, there is a further issue as to the pre-contractual negotiations and liability in connection therewith.
In addition, in many arbitrations there are claims based on tort or delict. Where, as discussed below, the parties have agreed
on the law applicable to the contract, there may be an issue in such cases as to whether that agreement extends to issues such
as pre-contractual claims or tort or delict claims.
21-6
In addition, adjudicating a dispute on the merits frequently involves consideration of laws applicable to various aspects relating
to the parties and the activity to be carried out. As discussed under art.6, the issues relating to the capacity of parties are dealt
with generally under the law of incorporation or residence of the relevant party. Issues relating to performance may be subject
to mandatory rules of the place of performance.
Footnotes
111
See the discussion in Audit, Choice of the Applicable Law by the Parties, in Dossier of the ICC Institute of World
Business Law (2014), 10.
112
Limitation periods are frequently considered matters of substantive law governed by the law governing the contract.
However, in some instances, limitation periods are considered matters of procedure.
113
The issues relating to privilege are discussed with respect to disclosure at para.25-69 and following.
114
Interest may be provided for in the relevant contract. In addition, the law of the place of arbitration may expressly permit
the granting of interest.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
