Section G. - Proceedings After the Hearing, UKBC-REDFERN 530638642 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section G. - Proceedings After the Hearing
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 6 - Conduct of the Proceedings
Section G. - Proceedings After the Hearing
(a) Introduction
6. 213
In theory, the hearing should conclude the participation of the parties in the arbitration. Indeed, it is good practice for the
arbitral tribunal to declare the evidentiary record closed. 203  This will not prevent the parties, if so agreed by the tribunal, from
submitting post-hearing briefs, but it will prevent them from submitting new unsolicited material after the hearing, which will
require further procedural orders to enable the other party to reply.
(b) Post-hearing briefs
6. 214
It is increasingly common for the parties to submit post-hearing briefs, often of limited length, summarising the main points
that have emerged in evidence and argument. The emergence of such a practice may be seen as a direct corollary of the practice
of limiting the length of the hearing—and, indeed, of imposing time constraints on the parties at the hearing. 204
6. 215
Thus the most frequently adopted form of proceedings after the closure of the hearings is an exchange of post-hearing briefs.
Such a final written opportunity to make submissions is particularly useful where the arbitral tribunal has raised questions during
the closing arguments and the parties’ counsel wish to have time to undertake research before giving their answers. 205
(c) Introduction of new evidence
6. 216
The post-hearing briefs may not always be the end of the proceedings. First, fresh evidence may come to light after the hearing,
but before the arbitral tribunal has issued its award. In these circumstances, the arbitral tribunal has discretion to reopen the
proceedings at the request of the party wishing to present the new evidence. 206  Clearly, it should refuse to do so where the fresh
evidence is not needed for its deliberations, or if the new material appears to be a spurious attempt to delay the proceedings.
But, in general, arbitral tribunals prefer to determine a dispute with the benefit of all of the relevant evidence in their possession.
If the fresh evidence turns out to be valueless, or without merit, the opposing party may be compensated by the arbitral tribunal
in relation to the additional costs incurred, and by an award of interest where this is appropriate.
6. 217
The course that should be adopted by the arbitral tribunal depends on the circumstances of each case and the nature of the
material to which a response must be made. However, arbitral tribunals normally (and rightly) try to ensure that additional
hearings do not take place unless they are really necessary; they generally permit one party to put in further written evidence
and submissions only if the other has presented fresh material at, or subsequent to, the hearing.

Section G. - Proceedings After the Hearing, UKBC-REDFERN 530638642 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
203
Some sets of institutional rules require it: e.g., ICC Rules, Art. 27; DIAC Rules, Art. 34; SIAC Rules, r. 32.1.
204
See section on ‘Hearings’ above.
205
AAA Case No. 13T1810031097.
206
See, e.g., UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 31.2; Swiss Rules, Art. 31; VIAC Rules, Art. 32; SIAC Rules, r. 32.1.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
