Anti-suit injunctions, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406974 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Anti-suit injunctions
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Anti-suit injunctions
28-61
To preserve the arbitral process, a party may seek as an interim measure an injunction from the Tribunal to prevent the other
party from bringing court or arbitral proceedings in breach of the arbitration agreement. Article 28(1) permits Tribunals to issue
such injunctions in particular as they are in effect enforcement of the negative obligation of an arbitration agreement, although
these applications may soon be more frequently made under art.29. 518  In addition, although this discussion relates to interim
measures, there is an issue as to whether a Tribunal can and should order permanent anti-suit injunctions which goes beyond
the scope of this discussion. Finally, within the EU, an EU court cannot enjoin proceedings before another EU court. However,
a Tribunal may enjoin proceedings before an EU court presumably of a state other than that of the place of arbitration. 519
28-62
In ICC Case No.18563 an anti-suit injunction was granted with respect to state court proceedings. The arbitration related to
a license agreement between the respondent and claimant 1. 520  At the request of the respondent, claimant 2 was joined to
the arbitration, as the respondent maintained that it was the proper party to the license agreement. The respondent brought
court proceedings and obtained a temporary restraining order in a state court. The claimants sought an injunction from the
Tribunal against the respondent with respect to such court proceedings. The Tribunal granted the injunction. The Tribunal
stated that the criteria were different for an anti-suit injunction than for other interim measures as the issue with respect to the
anti-suit injunction was whether there was a breach of the arbitration agreement and a risk of aggravation of the dispute. To
determine whether there was a breach of the arbitration clause, the Tribunal analysed the parties to the arbitration and state
court proceedings, the claims, and the contract, noting in particular that the presence of additional parties and reference to an
additional contract did not affect the decision as they would not be subject to the anti-suit injunction. The Tribunal then analysed
the aggravation to the dispute and the timing of the application and issued the order, which it reserved the right to amend.
28-63
The decision in ICC Case No.18563 is to be contrasted with the decision in ICC Case No.14581 where a Tribunal declined to
issue an injunction against parallel arbitration proceedings. The Tribunal noted that it must be satisfied that there was a breach
of the arbitration agreement and that it was not satisfied that it could do so at that point in time as the relevant arbitration clause
was not entirely clear. 521
28-64
The basic issue with respect to an anti-suit injunction is whether it suffices in and of itself that the Tribunal is satisfied that the
party is breaching the arbitration agreement or whether some further prejudice must be shown. For the authors, if the Tribunal
is satisfied that the court proceedings are in breach of the arbitration agreement, that should suffice. The parties agreed on
arbitration because they wished to exclude court proceedings on the substantive issues submitted to arbitration. A breach of this
obligation, and incurring costs preparing for and defending court proceedings, will almost invariably result in prejudice and
that prejudice should suffice to justify an anti-suit injunction subject to considerations of comity. Nevertheless, the argument
is made that a state court has jurisdiction to decide whether proceedings should be brought despite an arbitration clause and
that that Tribunal should defer to that jurisdiction. Although considerations of comity are persuasive to many Tribunals, for
the authors there is an issue of the basic effect of an arbitration agreement. One of the negative effects of such an agreement
is that a party should not bring proceedings before state courts that should be before the Tribunal. Therefore, the Tribunal is
justified in issuing such an order.

Anti-suit injunctions, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406974 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
518
For a general discussion of anti-suit injunctions see Gaillard, “Anti-Suit Injunctions Issued by Arbitrators” in ICCA
International Arbitration 2006: Back to the Basics? 235 and Besson, “Anti-Suit Injunctions by ICC Emergency
Arbitrators”, International Arbitration under Review: Essays in Honour of John Beechey (2015), 16, who rightly stressed
that the conditions for granting anti-suit injunctions on an interim basis remain unsettled.
519
Gazprom OAO v Lietuvos Respublik (C-536/13) European Court of Justice Judgment of the Court (Grand Chamber)
of 13 May 2015.
520
Procedural Order of December 2012 in ICC Case No.18563 (Extract) in Special Supplement 2014: Procedural Decisions
in ICC Arbitration, 89.
521
Procedural Order of June 2007 in ICC Case No.14581 (Extract) in Special Supplement 2014: Procedural Decisions in
ICC Arbitration, 86.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
