Section E. - Appointment of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638629 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section E. - Appointment of Arbitrators
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 4 - Establishment and Organisation of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section E. - Appointment of Arbitrators
4. 25
There are several methods of appointing an arbitral tribunal. The most usual are: (i) by agreement of the parties; (ii) by an
arbitral institution; (iii) by means of a list system; (iv) by means of the co-arbitrators appointing a presiding arbitrator; (v) by
a professional institution or a trade association; (vi) by a national court; or (vii) by an appointing authority. Each method is
now considered in turn.
(a) Agreement of the parties
4. 26
As we have previously stated (i) a major attraction of arbitration is that it allows parties to submit a dispute to judges of their
choice, and (ii) where the arbitral tribunal is to consist of three arbitrators, it is usual for each party to nominate one arbitrator,
leaving the third arbitrator to be appointed by one of the methods mentioned above. Where possible, an agreement is always
preferable.
4. 27
From time to time, a respondent may seek to derail an arbitration which it seems destined to lose, by refusing to appoint an
arbitrator. The party-appointed arbitrators may also try but fail to agree on a presiding arbitrator. A reliable arbitral institution
will almost invariably have a provision in its rules that will allow it to make the necessary appointment in the event of default. 40
In a situation where such a provision does not exist (for example, in an ad hoc arbitration), it may be necessary to rely on the law
of the seat of the arbitration and to ask for the appointment to be made by the competent national courts. However, relying on
national courts to appoint is likely to lead to delay and uncertainty, particularly if the relevant court does not have a sufficiently
international perspective to make a suitable appointment.
It is therefore sensible to ensure that there is a provision for the ‘default appointment’ of an arbitrator in the arbitration agreement
itself. This can be done either by choosing an arbitral institution whose rules provide for a default appointment or, in an ad hoc
arbitration, by nominating an appointing authority that will make such an appointment.
(b) Appointment by arbitral institutions
4. 28
Arbitral institutions each have their own rules for appointing arbitrators. The ICC Rules, for example, provide that where there
is to be a sole arbitrator and the parties fail to reach an agreed nomination within thirty days from the communication of the
Request for Arbitration, the arbitrator will be appointed by the ICC Court. 41  The Rules also provide that, where there is to be
an arbitral tribunal of three arbitrators, the third arbitrator will be appointed by the ICC Court, unless the parties have agreed
upon another procedure, in which case the agreed appointment must be made within a limited time. 42  In contrast, the rules of
the China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission (CIETAC) require the parties to nominate their respective
arbitrators from CIETAC’s designated panel of arbitrators; alternatively, if they agree to nominate from outside the panel of
arbitrators, then that nomination is subject to confirmation by the chair of CIETAC. 43

Section E. - Appointment of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638629 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4. 29
As we indicated earlier, in referring to default appointments in ad hoc arbitrations, many arbitral institutions offer their services
as ‘appointing authority’ for a fee, including the ICC, the ICDR, the LCIA, and the PCA in The Hague. 44  The Secretary-
General of ICSID is also prepared to act as ‘designating’, or appointing, authority for ad hoc arbitration agreements that do
not fall within the scope of the ICSID Convention. 45  It is always worth considering the use of these services in an ad hoc
arbitration. What the arbitral institutions and international bodies have to offer, compared to national courts or professional
societies and trade associations, is their day-to-day involvement in international arbitration and their access to (and knowledge
of) a pool of highly qualified arbitrators.
(c) List system
4. 30
A ‘list system’ is often used to assist the parties to reach agreement over the identity of the president of the arbitral tribunal.
Typically, the parties will agree on a list of the required criteria (for example, experience, language, nationality) and then each
party will compile a list of three or four persons considered to be acceptable as arbitrators who comply with those criteria,
perhaps with a brief note of the relevant experience and qualifications of each. The lists are then exchanged simultaneously in
an attempt to reach agreement. If there is a common candidate, that person is appointed president. Even if this is not the case,
the process focuses the thinking of the parties and may help to pave the way towards agreement. 46
4. 31
A variation on this system, used by some arbitral institutions (particularly the ICDR, the SCC, and the Netherlands Arbitration
Institute (NAI)), is the dispatch by the institution of the same list of names to each party. 47  Each party then returns the list,
deleting any name to which it objects and grading the remainder in order of preference. The appointing authority then chooses
an arbitrator from the list, in accordance with the order of preference indicated by the parties. The system is slower than that
of direct appointment by an arbitral institution but has the advantage of offering an element of choice (even though this choice
is restricted to persons initially named by the institution on its list). This procedure may be used to appoint a sole arbitrator as
well as to choose the presiding arbitrator. 48
(d) Appointment by co-arbitrators of the presiding arbitrator
4. 32
Where a tribunal of three arbitrators is to be constituted, the arbitration clause or submission agreement often provides that each
party is to nominate one arbitrator and that the two arbitrators so nominated will choose the third, who acts as the presiding
arbitrator. The same solution is also found in some arbitration rules. 49  This is undoubtedly the most satisfactory way of
nominating a third arbitrator, since the party-nominated arbitrators will have confidence in their chosen candidate and their
ability to work well together. Before putting forward a possible candidate, it is usual for each of the arbitrators to inform its
appointing party of the candidate or candidates that the two co-arbitrators are considering for appointment, so as to ensure that
there is not some well-founded objection to that candidate (for instance, a conflict of interest or history of personal animosity).
This is considered an acceptable exception to the general rule that there should be ‘no ex parte communication’ in international
arbitration. 50  To avoid any misunderstandings, the party-nominated arbitrators should inform each other that they are following
this procedure. 51

Section E. - Appointment of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638629 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
(e) Professional institution
4. 33
The president or a senior officer of a professional institution may be named as the appointing authority in arbitration clauses,
but before doing this, the parties should ensure that the institution will in fact provide this service, that the person concerned
will accept the role, and that the terms (cost and time) of such appointment are understood. In general terms, it is not an option
that we would recommend, as it is unlikely that the institution concerned will have a strong knowledge of suitable candidates
for an international arbitration; and if there are specialist issues which fall within the knowledge and experience of the members
of a particular institution, these can usually be more suitably addressed through expert evidence. More importantly, it is usually
impossible to know whether a specific dispute will be of a technical or legal nature before it arises. 52
(f) National courts
4. 34
If the parties are unable to reach agreement upon the appointment of an arbitrator and no one is empowered in the arbitration
clause or submission agreement to make the appointment for them, the courts of the seat will usually have the power to nominate
any remaining members of the tribunal, irrespective of the nationality of the parties or the law governing the substance of the
dispute. The relevant rules are usually set out in the arbitration law of the seat (which may be a separate statute or part of a
wider code of civil procedure). It is usually sufficient for the claimant (who is invariably the party interested in proceeding
speedily) to apply to the relevant court for the appointment. For example, under the English Arbitration Act, the courts have
default powers to:
 
• give directions as to the making of any necessary appointments
 
• direct that the tribunal shall be constituted by such appointments (or any one or more of them) as have been made
 
• revoke any appointments already made
 
• make any necessary appointments itself 53
In making any appointments, a court will often ask the parties’ lawyers, or the party-nominated arbitrators, to suggest possible
candidates.
4. 35
In principle, a national court will have jurisdiction where the arbitration is to be conducted on its territory. 54  Accordingly,
there should be no problem where the seat of arbitration is specified in the arbitration clause or submission agreement: the
party wishing to proceed with the arbitration simply applies to the national courts for the appointment to be made. However,
a problem arises if the seat of arbitration has not been specified in the arbitration clause or submission agreement. It may be
possible to persuade a court to assume jurisdiction, for example on the basis that the law governing the substantive issues in
dispute is the law of the country of that court, or that the respondent is within the jurisdiction of the court (and so capable of
being compelled to carry out its orders). 55
4. 36
This situation offers a clear example of the dangers inherent in a defective, or ‘pathological’, arbitration clause. A clause that
fails to provide either for an effective method of constituting the arbitral tribunal or for the place of arbitration risks being
inoperable. If a claimant takes its case to a national court, it may be met by an application for a stay of the proceedings on
the grounds of the existence of an arbitration clause. At best, there is considerable potential for delay. At worst, there is the
possibility that the claimant may be deprived of an effective remedy.
4. 37

Section E. - Appointment of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638629 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
Countries with developed systems of arbitration law recognise the role that needs to be played by their law and by their courts
in assisting the arbitral process. Accordingly, national courts are usually empowered to appoint arbitrators where necessary.
Wide powers to appoint arbitrators are contained in most modern national arbitration laws. 56  However, the position under the
relevant local law should be checked carefully at the time of selecting the place of arbitration.
(g) Appointing authority
4. 38
As we have already emphasised, parties should recognise that in an ad hoc arbitration, it is in their common interest to choose an
appointing authority by agreement (such as the PCA)—or, at least, to choose a method of designating an appointing authority.
One way of doing this is to adopt the UNCITRAL Rules. Under these Rules, if the parties have not agreed upon an appointing
authority, a party may request the Secretary-General of the PCA to designate one. 57
(h) Designation by the Secretary-General of the PCA
4. 39
The UNCITRAL Rules do not specify the information that must be supplied to the Secretary-General of the PCA for the purposes
of designating an appointing authority. However, in practice, the PCA asks for the same documents as are required under Article
6.6 of the UNCITRAL Rules or the appointment of an arbitrator. These documents include the notice of arbitration and the
response, if it exists. The Secretary-General will usually also request copies of correspondence indicating that the designation
of an appointing authority is necessary because a party has failed to appoint an arbitrator, or that it has been impossible to reach
agreement on a sole or presiding arbitrator, or that there is a challenge to an arbitrator.
4. 40
If the respondent does not participate in making a request, the Secretary-General writes to the respondent to invite comments
and specifies a reasonable time for reply. Before designating an appointing authority, the Secretary-General may also ask for
the names of potential arbitrators and appointing authorities that have been discussed between the parties and rejected. 58
After reviewing the documents submitted and considering any comments from the parties, the Secretary-General selects the
organisation or individual that he or she considers best placed to act as appointing authority. 59  The Secretary-General then
enquires whether that organisation or individual is willing to accept the designation. If the answer is in the affirmative, the
parties are informed and requested to approach the ap-pointing authority directly for the next steps. The Secretary-General does
not give reasons for the decision. 60
Footnotes
40
See, e.g., ICC Rules, Art. 12.2; LCIA Rules, Art. 7.2.
41
ICC Rules, Art. 12.3.
42
ICC Rules, Art. 12.4 and 12.5.
43
CIETAC Rules, Art. 26.
44
The fees for this service are typically £1,250 for the LCIA (Schedule of Costs), €3,000 for the secretary-general of the
PCA, US$5,000 for the ICC, and US$2,500–5,000 for ICDR (Canada). These figures are available on each institution’s
website. See Rules of ICC as Appointing Authority in UNCITRAL or other arbitration proceedings, Appendix, Art. 1;
ICDR Canadian Rules, p. 42.
45
https://icsid.worldbank.org/services/appointments-challenges/appointing-authority.

Section E. - Appointment of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638629 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
46
One problem that has arisen in practice when the list system has failed and the appointment has been left to a third-party
institution, or court, relates to the appointing authority appointing a person who has appeared on one of the party’s lists.
It is not uncommon for the other party to object to such an appointment on the basis that the candidate has already been
discussed by the parties, thereby ‘burning’ all of those names. To avoid this risk, it is useful to agree in advance that
the inclusion of a name on the list will not operate as a bar to the eventual appointment of such a person by the arbitral
institution or appointing authority. Another, more tactical, approach is for a party not to nominate the person whom it
wants on the first list, but to keep the name in reserve, so that it might emerge in subsequent negotiations. However,
such gamesmanship may prove to be self-defeating if the other party agrees to a person named on the first list!
47
ICDR Rules, Art. 13.6.
48
UNCITRAL Rules, Arts 8.2 and 9.3.
49
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 9.1.
50
The IBA Guidelines on Party Representation provide that communications between a party representative and a
prospective or party-nominated arbitrator relating to the selection of the presiding arbitrator fall outside the general rule
that party representatives should not engage in ex parte communications with an arbitrator concerning the arbitration
(see Guideline 8(b)).
51
As an alternative method to avoid the problem of biased arbitrators, the CPR Rules provide that neither the CPR nor the
parties shall advise or otherwise provide any information or indication to any arbitrator candidate or appointed arbitrator
as to which party selected either of the party-designated arbitrators (‘blind appointments’) (r. 5.4).
52
There may be exceptions, e.g. where the nature of the contract is likely to implicate only the area of expertise of the
institution. For example, one author was appointed chair of an ad hoc arbitral tribunal by the President of the Law Society
of England and Wales (the governing authority of the solicitors’ branch of the profession) acting as the appointing
authority in a dispute under a severance agreement between a solicitor who was a partner of a law firm and the firm
itself, where issues of solicitors’ ethics were concerned. It was thus sensible for a solicitor (which the institution was
well-placed to identify) to be appointed as arbitrator.
53
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 18(3).
54
See the discussion concerning the lex arbitri in Chapter 3, paragraphs 3.42ff.
55
For example, the English court may appoint an arbitrator where the seat of arbitration has not been designated, provided
that the proceedings have sufficient connection with England, English Arbitration Act 1996, ss. 2(4) and 18. Under
French law, the French courts may act in support of an international arbitration located abroad if (a) the parties have
agreed that French procedural law shall apply to the arbitration; (b) the parties have expressly granted jurisdiction to
French courts over disputes relating to the arbitral procedure; or (c) one of the parties is exposed to a risk of a denial
of justice (understood as the impossibility to constitute the arbitral tribunal by any other means). See French Code of
Civil Procedure, art. 1505. See also Seraglini and Ortscheidt, Droit de l’Arbitrage Interne et International (2nd edn,
LGDJ, 2019), paras 774-781.
56
See, e.g., Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, s. 179; French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1452. Article 11(4) of the Model Law confers
upon the appropriate national courts the power to appoint arbitrators where necessary. The English Arbitration Act 1996,
s. 18, gives the court the power to make an appointment in the event of a failure of the procedure for the appointment
of the arbitral tribunal.
57
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 6.2.
58
Hence the need to be clear, before discussing candidates between the parties, as to whether the candidates rejected may
subsequently be appointed by an appointing authority, or if they are excluded or ‘burned’ as a result. Most parties agree
to a ‘no burn’ rule whereby candidates rejected between the parties may still be appointed by the appointing authority.
59
The views of the parties, as well as concerns of speed and cost, may influence the Secretary-General’s choice of an
individual, rather than of an organisation. The Secretary-General’s designations of organisations include the ACICA,
the AAA, the Arbitral Centre of the Austrian Federal Economic Chamber, the Bombay Incorporated Law Society, the
CRCICA, the CIArb, the DIS, the HKIAC, the ICC, ICSID, the KLRCA, the LCIA, SIAC, and the SAA. Examples
of designations of individuals include: a former chief justice of New South Wales, Australia, in a dispute between a
Korean company and an Asian state entity; an international arbitration practitioner based in the United Kingdom, in a
dispute between a French company and the government of a Central European Republic; and an international arbitration
practitioner based in the United States, in a dispute between a Dutch company and an African state entity.
60
In 2019, the PCA received 39 requests to designate an appointing authority or to act directly as the appointing authority.
See PCA, Annual Report of the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA, 2019), p. 10.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
