Article 18(2), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407089 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 18(2)
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
International systems from a procedural point of view
Article 18(2)
“The arbitral tribunal may, after consulting the parties, conduct hearings and meetings at any location it considers
appropriate, unless otherwise agreed by the parties.”
18-40
Whatever the place of arbitration may be, the Tribunal may hold hearings elsewhere in accordance with art.18(2) unless the
parties agree otherwise.
18-41
The initial and normally first meeting of the parties is the case management conference. 65  In addition, there may be subsequent
meetings and hearings to deal with procedural issues. The main hearing is the evidentiary hearing or hearings. In addition, there
may be a hearing for legal argument. Due in particular to issues of timing, case management conferences and other procedural
hearings are usually, although not always, held by telephone or by video conferencing.
18-42
Prior to the global outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020, the usual practical assumption was that evidentiary hearing
would generally be held in the (physical) presence of the parties and that this would happen at the place of arbitration. However,
art.18(2). expressly provides that the Tribunal may decide to hold hearings at places other than the place of arbitration unless
otherwise agreed by the parties. There may be an issue as to whether the parties have agreed on the place of hearings. In some
instances, parties may argue that the arbitration clause is phrased in a way that provides not only the place of arbitration, but also
the place for the hearings. This is not the case under the standard ICC arbitration clause and is rather rare. In other instances,
the parties may argue that if the choice of the place of arbitration is to best serve its purpose, then meetings and hearings with
the Tribunal should also take place there. This would always be a fair, although not necessarily compelling, point to make.
18-43
Article 18(2) is subject to the law of the place of arbitration. Therefore, it is conceivable that the law of the place of arbitration
requires that some or all hearings be held at the place of arbitration. However, the laws of the major centres of arbitration do
not appear to contain any such requirement and in some cases expressly permit the holding of hearings elsewhere than at the
place of arbitration. Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Model Law provides a good example for that approach.
18-44
There are various reasons for holding physical hearings and meetings at a place other than the place of arbitration. Where the
place of arbitration was agreed upon by the parties, a Tribunal will have to consider that the so agreed place was probably the
result of a bargain between the parties at the time the arbitration clause was negotiated. Arbitrators should therefore always
have due regard to the parties’ reasonable and legitimate expectations, 66  although that should of course be balanced against
concern that the Tribunal may have as to interference by local courts. 67  In the same way, the Tribunal should take into account
sensitivities of the parties.
18-45

Article 18(2), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407089 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
When considering whether to meet at a place other than the place of arbitration, the Tribunal should explain to the parties why
it considers its decision is appropriate. Costs saving and/or the convenience of the Tribunal, the parties and/or the witnesses
are usually the most common reasons invoked although the list is not exhaustive. Another reason may be scheduling. Some
arbitrators or lawyers may only be able to attend a hearing or meeting if it is held in a particular city due to other commitments.
Usually, the parties are flexible about most hearings, although, with respect to the evidentiary hearings, the prevailing practice
seems to be to hold the hearings at the place of arbitration.
18-46
Related to the issue of the place for holding physical hearings is the alternative means of communication, such as the use of
video conferencing or telephone conferences. This is expressly anticipated in art.24(4) for the case management conference. The
use of videoconferences as a substitute of physical hearing this technology with respect to fact-finding is discussed under art.25
and art.26(1) 68  and is the subject of the ICC’s Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings set out in Part II at Document 9.2.
Footnotes
65
Unless it is held by telephone or videoconference instead of a physical meeting, see at para.24-5.
66
See Lalive, Poudret & Reymond, op. cit., p.297; Poudret & Besson, op. cit., p.111; Redfern & Hunter with Blackaby
& Partasides, op. cit., p.86.
67
This risk may be heightened when the place of arbitration is in the State of a party, which itself is a party of the arbitration,
Scherer, para.18-38 fn.64. In ICC Case No.17734, for example, at a hearing in Paris, the lawyer for a French government
defence entity threatened criminal proceedings against witnesses. The Tribunal did not react. The opposing party ignored
the threat but insisted that the subsequent hearing be held outside France.
68
See paras 25-25 and 26-5, 26-15.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
