Security for costs of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406962 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Security for costs of the arbitration
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Security for costs of the arbitration
28-32
It is undisputed that in an ICC arbitration, security for costs can be granted by way of an interim measure under art.28(1). In
most jurisdictions, a Tribunal would appear to be entitled to order that a party provide security for costs of the arbitration. The
English Arbitration Act 1996 expressly provides for such orders and in most other jurisdictions, there would appear to be no
impediment to such an order. 490
28-33
However, there are varied views as to whether it is appropriate to order security for costs in an ICC arbitration. In large part,
this reflects the practice in state court proceedings. In English court proceedings, security for costs is relatively commonplace.
In American and French court proceedings, they are virtually unknown. 491  In German court proceedings, a claimant indirectly
provides such security by depositing an amount based on the amount of the dispute to secure the court’s costs, not, however,
the legal costs of the other side. 492  These court proceedings are not directly relevant to security for costs orders, but a Tribunal
with London as the place of arbitration may well be more open to ordering security for costs than a Tribunal seated elsewhere.
28-34
The difficulty is compounded in international arbitration, because the parties have to pay advances on the costs of arbitration.
Therefore, there is a concern that requiring a party to provide security for costs may stifle valid claims. As a result, the practice
of Tribunals has varied considerably. 493  Set out below are some examples of where Tribunals have dealt with applications for
security for costs followed by general references to additional cases.
28-35
An award under the Rules of the Zurich Chamber of Commerce decided that an insolvent company should be ordered to provide
security for the costs of arbitration, and analysed the position as follows:
“the modern view expressed in Swiss legal doctrine and arbitral practice is that the authority granted to the
arbitrators by art.183 PILA also extends to orders requesting a party to provide security for the opposing party’s
legal costs.
Recent arbitral decisions appear to signal differing views regarding the circumstances under which security for
costs may be ordered. In an unpublished arbitral decision of December 1995, it was held that security should only
be ordered in exceptional circumstances, that is if there is a clear and present danger that a future cost award would
not be enforceable, e.g. because of a party’s insolvency as proven by the applicant.
A party’s insolvency is a common ground for granting security for costs. p 73, para.2 to 5 of the Zurich Civil
Procedure Code lists various grounds on which a court is allowed to request a claimant to provide security for
costs all of which are based on the risk of claimant’s insolvency.
A recent arbitral decision, by contrast, appears to consider a mere potential risk of non-enforceability of a future
cost award as insufficient grounds; it rather emphasizes the requirement that an order for security shall not unduly
restrict the party’s access to arbitral justice and that the principle of equal treatment of the parties should be
observed.” (citations omitted) 494

Security for costs of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406962 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
28-36
In a 2005 ICC case, a Swiss respondent requested that a Tribunal sitting in Geneva order security for costs, covering inter alia
the claimant’s share of the ICC arbitration and its own legal costs, against a Nigerian claimant. The respondent based its request
on the alleged fact that the claimant would encounter difficulties to effect a payment abroad in favour of the respondent, and
that enforcing an award in Nigeria would require lengthy and costly procedures. The Tribunal rejected the respondent’s request
given the absence of any special circumstances justifying such a decision. 495
28-37
In ICC Case No.13070, 496  a Tribunal sitting in Paris, rejected the respondent’s request for security for costs against the claimant
based on the lack of exceptional circumstances. The Tribunal appeared to consider deterioration of the financial situation of a
claimant as constituting an exceptional circumstance justifying security for costs. However, the Tribunal held that the respondent
had failed to provide specific proof thereof in the case. 497
28-38
In ICC Case No.13359, a Tribunal sitting in Paris by a majority decision refused to order security for costs where the claimant
was apparently funding the arbitration out of its current assets and had paid its share of the advance on costs. 498
28-39
In ICC Case No.14355, a Tribunal sitting in Switzerland refused a request for security for costs where the claimant was insolvent,
based in particular on the concern that it would stifle the claim. As regards the insolvency, the Tribunal held that that was a
commercial risk and it was not in a position to accept or exclude that the respondent had contributed to the insolvency. 499
28-40
In ICC Case No.14433, a sole arbitrator sitting in London refused to order security for costs after noting that such an order should
be granted sparingly and in limited circumstances. The sole arbitrator listed as factors to consider in rendering the decision the
bona fides of the claim, the prospects of success, the admissions or offers, the oppressive features of the application, the effect
of the respondent’s behaviour on the claimant’s financial condition, whether there is a risk of irreparable harm, whether there
was a fundamental change in the claimant’s financial situation since the arbitration agreement was entered into and whether
it would be “just” to make the order. 500
28-41
In ICC Case No.14661, a claimant obtained an order for security for costs against a respondent who had advanced counterclaims.
The claimant sought further security after 93 per cent of the respondent’s counterclaims had been rejected. By majority decision,
the Tribunal rejected the request. The Tribunal held that security for costs should be solely for future costs and those would
be limited to the post-hearing briefs. 501
28-42
In ICC Case No.14993, the Sole Arbitrator sitting in Vienna refused a request for security for costs holding that it was insufficient
that the respondent had doubts as to claimant’s solvency due in particular to losses over the prior two years and noted that were
no other circumstances in favour of such measures (such as bankruptcy, the use of a special purpose vehicle, transfer of assets
or a change of domicile or residence). 502
28-43
In ICC Case No.15218, a Sole Arbitrator sitting in Bern granted a request for security for costs where the claimant was insolvent
and the financial situation of the claimant had deteriorated since the contract was signed (although the claimant attributed that
deterioration to the respondent). 503
28-44
In ICC Case No.16945, a Tribunal sitting in Paris refused to order security for costs against claimant, as the respondent, a
Ministry of Natural Resources from a Middle Eastern country, knew, when entering into a Production Sharing Agreement with

Security for costs of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406962 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
claimant, that the latter was “a company organized under the laws of the British Virgin Islands, which do not require detailed
filings of financial statements”. The Tribunal opined that “by entering into the PSA with an off-shore company, amongst others,
it accepted the risk that should litigation occur, the Ministry would be faced with a company that would not necessarily have the
ability to apply the possible costs of an arbitration against its assets”. The Tribunal added that since this was an ICC arbitration,
the claimant would in any event have to pay its share of the advance on costs. 504
28-45
In ICC Case No.19933 (unpublished), a Tribunal sitting in London rejected a claim for security for costs which was brought
based in part on the US Sanctions regulations, on the fact that the claimant was based in a non-New York Convention country
and on the fact that the claimant had failed to pay a costs order in another related arbitration. Key factors in rejecting the
application were the fact that it was brought after the claimant had succeeded with respect to its claim on jurisdiction and a
general license had been issued by the US authorities for the relevant country. In addition, the Tribunal was concerned about
stifling the claim. 505
28-46
In ICC Case No.20707, a Tribunal sitting in Paris rejected the respondent’s claim for security for costs against two claimants
that were part of a Consortium of contractors. One of the claimants had entered into insolvency proceedings even before the
arbitration had started, but not the other. The Tribunal noted, amongst other, that the court-appointed administrator of the first
claimant had currently sufficient cash funds available “to cover a possible cost award in Respondent’s favour”, and that the risk
that in the future this may not be the case was hypothetical, and did not appear to be imminent. The Tribunal then stated: “For
the Respondent to be able to fully assess that risk and its chances to obtain security for costs, under the circumstances of this
case, it seems fair that the [insolvent] Claimant informs it of the financial situation of its assets.” The Tribunal insisted that the
first claimant provide respondent with an update of its financial situation every six months. 506
28-47
In ICC Case No.21115 (unpublished) the Tribunal ordered security for costs after it ordered that the proceeds of a bank guarantee
be retained and not drawn by the respondent and that it be paid out in accordance with a final award. In this case, the security
for costs order was a consequence of the other order for interim relief granted in favour of the claimant.
In ICC Case No.25003/GR (unpublished) a Tribunal sitting in Rio de Janeiro rejected the respondent’s claim for security for
costs holding that it was insufficient that claimant’s financial situation “had significantly deteriorated as compared to the time
when the arbitration agreement was entered into”. The Tribunal added that the fact that claimant had not paid the cost order of
a previous award between the parties was “troubling”, but it did not consider that factor to be sufficient to order security for
costs as the respondent had “not pursued this claim beyond the two reminders” it sent to claimant, and had also not paid “its
share of the advance of costs” in the present arbitration. 507
28-48
As is clear from the above, applications for security for costs have become a regular feature in ICC arbitration. Such applications
have also been discussed for many years in the relevant literature. 508  However, the decisions of Tribunals are varied.
Nevertheless, for the authors a number of principles appear frequently. 509
28-49
First, a party applying for security for costs must generally be in a position to demonstrate that the other party’s financial situation
has deteriorated substantially since the date on which the arbitration agreement was signed. The underlying reason for this
approach is that the party seeking security for costs should have had a reasonable expectation that the other party would provide
security for costs when it agreed to arbitration. In the decisions referred to above, there is no clear indication of whether the
argument that the other party contributed to the deterioration in financial condition will be taken into account. For the authors,
that will most likely depend on the prima facie strength of the respective cases on the merits.
28-50
Second, a Tribunal will be concerned about the stifling of a claim, and the stronger that claim is, the greater that concern. This
issue is related to the issue of due process referred to in the Pirelli case for example. 510  In that case, the French Supreme Court
held that refusal to deal with counterclaims due to a failure to pay the portion of the advance on costs for the counterclaims
could result in a failure to respect access to justice and the principle of equality between the parties. Although this decision was

Security for costs of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406962 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
attenuated somewhat in the Lola Fleurs cases, it is one matter to have an (agreed) obligation to advance the costs of arbitration
and another to provide security for the other party’s costs. In considering whether a claim would be stifled, most Tribunals will
consider not only the financial condition of the party against whom the order is sought but also the financial resources that may
be available to the party whether through its shareholders.
28-51
Third, the timing of any application for security for costs is important and there is much to be said for the view that an application
should be for future costs only.
28-52
Fourth, the procedural behaviour of the parties will be a factor. If an application for security for costs is viewed as (another)
attempt to wear down the other party it may well be rejected as unjust.
28-53
Finally, the presence of a third party financing the arbitration changes the situation. If a party has arranged for such financing, the
likelihood of an order for security for costs is presumably much higher, although the cases reflecting this are, as yet, infrequent.
For the authors, to the extent a third party funder would participate in the benefits of any award, it should also participate to
a certain extent in the risk relating to costs. 511
Footnotes
490
Section 38(3) of the English Arbitration Act 1996 provides: “[t]he tribunal may order a Claimant to provide security
for the costs of the arbitration. This power shall not be exercised on the ground that the Claimant is–(a) an individual
ordinarily resident outside the United Kingdom, or (b) a corporation or association incorporated or formed under the
law of a country outside the United Kingdom, or whose central management and control is exercised outside the United
Kingdom”. The well-known Ken Ren case of the House of Lords, where the English Courts were requested to, and did,
order the Kenyan claimant, an insolvent project company, to post security for cost in an ICC arbitration, was based on
the law prior to the English Arbitration Act: [1994] 2 All E.R. 449 and (1995) YBCA Vol.XX p.228. See also Paulsson,
“The Unwelcome Atavism of Ken Ren: The House of Lords Shows is Meddle” [1994] ASA Bull. Vol.12, No.3/4, p.439.
491
Moreover, art.1468 of the CPC states in part that “only courts may order conservatory attachments and judicial security”.
492
Only when the party is a resident in a foreign country with which Germany is not bound through a multilateral or bilateral
treaty regarding civil or commercial matters, would the claimant have to post security for costs for the legal costs of the
other party. This is true for the US, the Philippines and Uganda, to give but three examples.
493
For an overview and a helpful table of decisions see Haridi, “Security for Costs and Claim under the ICC Rules of
Arbitration: Rare but Possible: A Survey of 23 ICC Procedural Orders and Final Awards” [2020] ICC DR Bull. No.2,
p.77. The author concludes: “Although tribunals are hesitant to award security for costs or for claim, the survey results
show that such requests can be successful. Financial instability or difficulty enforcing an award, standing alone, will not
typically suffice. In order to succeed, it is critical that the applicant point to some fundamental change in circumstance
—beyond the accepted risks inherent in international commercial agreements—resulting in a clear and present danger
that a future award would not be enforceable. This is a high bar for applicants to meet, but the survey results confirm
that it is possible. The results also show that although tribunals follow similar approaches, they have yet to determine
a single test, applicable to any security application.”
494
ZCC Arbitration Proceedings No.415 of November 2001, [2002] ASA Bull. Vol.20 No.3, p.467 at p.469.
495
ICC case No.13646, Procedural Order No.3 (2005), unreported where the Tribunal emphasised in its Procedural Order
the necessity for it to use such a power in a restrictive manner stating in particular that: “It is generally admitted, however,
that such power must be used in a restrictive manner. In Switzerland, this is, in particular, the opinion of Jean-François
Poudret and Sebastien Besson: ‘Un security for costs n’est à notre avis justifié que dans des cas très particuliers’ (Droit
comparé de l’arbitrage international, Bruylant L.G.D.J. Schulthess, 2002, §610). The abovementioned procedural order
issued by a tribunal sitting in Zurich expresses the same view: ‘Arbitral precedents … show that security for costs should
only be granted in exceptional circumstances and with the greatest reluctance’ (ASA Bulletin 2005, at p.112). As far as
ICC Arbitration is concerned, Y. Derains and E. Schwartz confirm that ‘those drafting the 1998 Rules were reluctant
to mention security for costs expressly because they did not wish to encourage the proliferation of such applications,

Security for costs of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406962 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
which, apart from being rare, are generally disfavoured in ICC arbitration’ (op. cit., p.297). This Arbitral Tribunal
shares the view that the mere existence of doubt as to the possibility of enforcing a future award against the other
party is not a sufficient ground for granting a request for security for costs. To impose such burden on a party requires
more than the ordinary risk that the party ordered to pay may not be willing and may not be easily forced to do so; it
requires the existence of special circumstances. Such necessity might be lightened if a very serious likelihood, if not
near certainty that the alleged debt exists or will exist could be established …” See also Puerto Rico Hospital Supply Inc
v Boston Scientific Corp, 21 October 2005 First Circuit US Court of Appeals, Mealey’s IAR Vol.20 No.10 p.16 (denial
of injunctive relief pending ICC arbitration by US court in absence of any irreparable harm for the requesting party);
Plama Consortium Ltd v Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No.ARB/03/24 of 6 September 2005, Mealey’s IAR Vol.20
No.10 p.8 (denial of a request for urgent provisional measures to protect a party’s right to non aggravation of a pending
arbitration claim in absence of a change of circumstances that threatens the ability of the Tribunal to grant the relief
sought by a party and the capability of giving effect to the relief).
496
ICC Case No.13070 (2006) (Interim Award), unreported.
497
The Tribunal stated in particular that: “Security for costs should only be granted in exceptional circumstances and
with the greatest reticence (Karrer/Desax, Security for Costs in International Arbitration, in: Briner/Fortier/Berger/
Bredow (eds.), Liber Amicorum Karl-Heinz Böckstiegel, Köln et al. 2001, Weigand (Ed.), Practitioner’s Handbook
on International Arbitration, Copenhague 2002, p.253). Insolvency must be considered as one of these exceptional
circumstances ([1997] ASA Bull, p.377), as well as the situation, where a claimant did no longer conduct its commercial
activity ([1999] ASA Bull, p.59). As a general rule, security for costs may only be ordered if, inter alia, the following
conditions are fulfilled: there must be a situation of urgency and a risk of substantial damage for the requesting party. It is
usually required to be in presence of a ‘fundamental change of the situation since the basic agreement between the parties
was entered into’ (Karrer/Desax, op. cit., p.345). In other words, the financial situation of the counterparty must have
deteriorated since the time when the parties concluded their agreement. Respondent does nowhere provide for specific
proof for any such deterioration of Claimant’s financial situation. Neither has it established that Claimant’s financial
situation has changed, either since the validity of the agreement or since the beginning of the arbitral proceedings. On
the other hand, Claimant rightly observes that 1/ so far, it has assumed the entirety of the arbitration costs, 2/ it is a
public institution under the Government monitoring. This last element, indeed, precludes by principle any serious risk
of insolvency or bankruptcy.”
498
Procedural Order of February 2006 in ICC Case No.13359 (Extract) in Special Supplement 2014: Procedural Decisions
in ICC Arbitration, 63.
499
Procedural Order of January 2007 in ICC Case No.14355 (Extract) in Special Supplement 2014: Procedural Decisions
in ICC Arbitration, 70.
500
Procedural Order of October 2008 in ICC Case No.14433 (Extract) in Special Supplement 2014: Procedural Decisions
in ICC Arbitration, 73.
501
Procedural Order of December 2008 in ICC Case No.14661 (Extract) in Special Supplement 2014: Procedural Decisions
in ICC Arbitration, 76 (p.74 for the original decision).
502
Procedural Order of December 2007 in ICC Case No.14993 (Extract) in Special Supplement 2014: Procedural Decisions
in ICC Arbitration, 77.
503
Procedural Order of July 2008 in ICC Case No.15218 (Extract) in Special Supplement 2014: Procedural Decisions in
ICC Arbitration, 79.
504
Procedural Order No.2 (2011). One of the authors was counsel of claimant.
505
One of the authors is the president of the Tribunal in the case.
506
Procedural Order No.3 (2015), unpublished. One of the co-authors was the president of the Tribunal in this case, which
ultimately ended by way of a settlement.
507
Procedural Order No.4 (2020), unpublished. One of the co-authors was the president of the Tribunal in this in this case.
508
Veit, “Note–Procedural Order No.14 of 27 November 2002-Security for Costs in International Arbitration–Some
Comments to Procedural Order No.14 of 27 November 2002” [2005] ASA Bull. Vol.28 No.1, p.116; Besson, “Arbitrage
international et mesures provisoires–Etude de droit comparé”, op. cit., para.37, p.38 and para.358 p.220; Sandrock, “The
Cautio Judicatum Solvi in Arbitration Proceedings or The Duty of an Alien Claimant to Provide Security for the Costs
of the Defendant” (1997) J. Int. Arb. Vol.4 No.2, p.17 at p.28; Karrer and Desax, “Security for Costs in International
Arbitration; Why, When and What if …” in Liber Amicorum Karl-Heinz Böckstiegel (Carl Heymanns Verlag, 2001),
p.339.
509
A very helpful document is the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators in 2016 entitled “Applications for Costs” (the “CIArb
Applications for Costs Guidelines”). These guidelines are often used particularly for international arbitrations where
the place of arbitration is England; however, they were drafted by international practitioners and refer to various ICC
decisions on applications for costs.

Security for costs of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406962 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
510
28 March 2013, Arrêt n° 392 du 28 mars 2013 (11-27.770).
511
On this subject, see V. Frignati, “Ethical implications of third-party funding in international arbitration”, [2016] Arb.
Int. No.3, pp.505-522; N. Darwazeh & A. Leleu, “Disclosure and Security for Costs or How to Adress Imbalances
Created by Third-Party Funding”, [2016] J. Int. Arb. No.2, pp.125-150; K. H. Shahdadpuri, “Third-Party Funding in
International Arbitration: Regulating the Treacherous Trajectory”, [2016] Asian Int. Arb. J. No.2 pp.77-106.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
