Article 29(7), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407080 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 29(7)
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
(c)—The Arbitration Agreement is based on a treaty
Article 29(7)
“The Emergency Arbitrator Provisions are not intended to prevent any party from seeking urgent interim or conservatory
measures from a competent judicial authority at any time prior to making an application for such measures, and in
appropriate circumstances even thereafter, pursuant to the Rules. Any application for such measures from a competent
judicial authority shall not be deemed to be an infringement or a waiver of the arbitration agreement. Any such application
and any measures taken by the judicial authority must be notified without delay to the Secretariat.”
29-129
This provision is identical to art.28(2) as regards access to state courts to obtain interim relief, whether prior or after having
seized the Emergency Arbitrator. This provision was necessary to avoid the risk that a state court faced with a request for
provisional relief denies such a request on jurisdictional grounds, by arguing that, by agreeing to ICC arbitration and its
Emergency Arbitrator regime, the parties have effectively ruled out the state court’s jurisdiction to entertain requests for interim
or conservatory measures. 632
29-130
However, despite the terms of art.29(7), the actual effect of art.29 will depend on the law applicable where a party applies
for relief from the state court. In Gerald Metals SA v Timis 633  the applicant applied to the LCIA for the appointment of an
Emergency Arbitrator. The other party then provided an undertaking regarding disposition of assets including a provision for
prior notice to the applicant of any such disposal. The LCIA refused to appoint an Emergency Arbitrator. The court ruled that,
as a result of the Emergency Arbitrator provisions in the LCIA Rules, the court did not have jurisdiction to intervene under
s.44(3) of the Arbitration Act. In reaching this conclusion, the court specifically rejected the argument that art.9.12 of the LCIA
Rules (which corresponds to art.29(7)) prevents the existence of the Emergency Arbitrator provisions from limiting the scope
of s.44(3) of the Arbitration Act.
29-131
A further issue that will arise is the effect if any of a rejection of an application by an Emergency Arbitrator on the consideration
by a court of an application for interim measures. Presumably, the effect of any such application to an Emergency Arbitrator will
depend on the nature of the relief sought and the standards for such relief. However, it is to be expected that courts will take any
refusal to grant such relief by an Emergency Arbitrator into consideration in deciding whether or not to grant relief themselves.
29-132
The Emergency Arbitrator Provisions are not intended to exclude the jurisdiction of state courts to grant any kind of interim
or conservatory measures. The new Emergency Arbitrator Provisions were designed to provide parties to an ICC arbitration
agreement with an additional option to obtain swift provisional relief, and are thus premised on concurrent jurisdiction with the
state courts. 634  By providing an alternative to recourse to state courts to obtain provisional relief, the “one-stop shop” approach
under the Rules is meant to increase the overall attraction and effectiveness of the Rules. However, whenever the chances of
obtaining effective and prompt provisional relief exist only in the state courts, which for instance would be true whenever it
is necessary to have an order issued by surprise and thus ex parte, parties retain the possibility of seeking interim relief from
state courts.

Article 29(7), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407080 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
632
Voser, op. cit., at 814; Castineira, op. cit., at para.15; see Berger, op. cit., with respect to the pre-arbitral referee procedure,
at p.86.
633
Gerald Metals SA v Timis [2016] EWHC 2327 (Ch).
634
It is an altogether different option whether, as a matter of public policy, parties can exclude in advance the jurisdiction
of state courts to grant provisional relief.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
