Witness conferencing, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407072 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Witness conferencing
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Witness conferencing
26-46
In some civil law countries, such as France, there is a tradition in the criminal law of having the witnesses “confront” each other.
Some arbitrators have introduced a new method of hearing witnesses in which the factual witnesses are heard together. 432  This
method is viewed as one of the best ways of cutting through rhetoric and establishing what really happened. For example, at a
construction site, representatives of the contractor and a subcontractor may have worked together on a project for months and
in some instances if they testify together they will establish where the real problems were. Witness conferencing is also a way
of hearing more witnesses rapidly, which can be particularly appropriate where there is a large number of witnesses to be heard.
Both the IBA Rules on Evidence and the Prague Rules refer to the concept of witness conferencing. 433
26-47
By its nature, witness conferencing calls more upon the Tribunal, and particular the president, to organise the testimony and
to ensure that each factual and/or expert witness has a chance to express him or herself. Otherwise, there is a danger that,
instead of assisting in establishing the facts of the case, the witness conference does the contrary. For the lawyers, witness
conferencing leaves less control over the proceedings and may therefore be less predictable than traditional questioning. In the
authors' view, a Tribunal should not impose witness conferencing if the parties object to it. It should also abstain from it when
there exists visibly a discrepancy between the knowledge and/or experience of the witnesses. Otherwise, those confrontations
can sometimes become problematic.
Footnotes
432
Peter, “Witness ‘Conferencing” (2002) Arb. Int. Vol.18 No.1, p.47; R. Harbst, A Counsel’s Guide to Examining and
Preparing Witnesses in International Arbitration, (Kluwer Law International 2015) Ch.10: “Witness Conferencing”
p.159.
433
Article 8.3(g) of the IBA Rules on Evidence and art.5.9 of the Prague Rules.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
