Duration of Binding Effect of Order, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406964 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Duration of Binding Effect of Order
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Duration of Binding Effect of Order
29-96
In its sub-paras (a)–(d), art.6(6) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules lists four situations when the Order shall cease to be binding
upon the parties:
 
(a) “the President’s termination of the emergency arbitrator proceedings pursuant to Article 1(6) of this
Appendix”—
An applicant advances US$ 40,000 and bound to lose at least US$ 5,000 in the event the proceedings are terminated by
the ICC Court’s President. Therefore, the applicant will presumably seek to file the Request for Arbitration with 10 days
or any longer period set by the Emergency Arbitrator.
 
(b) “the acceptance by the Court of a challenge against the emergency arbitrator pursuant to Article 3 of this
Appendix”—
As stated above, as long as the ICC Court has not decided upon the challenge, the Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings
will continue their course. Thus, the Emergency Arbitrator may even render an Order before the ICC Court has made its
decision. If the ICC Court accepts a challenge against an Emergency Arbitrator, the Order would automatically lose its
effect. It would appear appropriate for the Secretariat to mention this effect in the notification letter to the parties with
reference to art.6(6)(b) Emergency Arbitrator Rules.
 
(c) “the arbitral Tribunal’s final award, unless the arbitral Tribunal expressly decides otherwise”—
The Order being interim in nature, it is the Tribunal’s award which will ultimately decide, one way or the other, but in any
event in a final manner, on the relief covered by the Order. Thus, normally, the Order of the Emergency Arbitrator ceases
to have binding effect upon the parties at the latest once an award is rendered by the Tribunal provided either that it is a
final award or that it deals with the interim relief that was the subject of the Emergency Arbitrator’s Order.
 
(d) “the withdrawal of all claims or the termination of the arbitration before the rendering of a final award”—
If a party withdraws its claims that were the subject of, or the basis for the Order, or if the arbitration is terminated for
whatever reason, the Order will automatically lose its effect. The termination may be due to non-payment of the advance
on cost, and may thus have been triggered by the Secretariat. It may also have been the result of a settlement agreement
by the parties.
29-97
There are at least two other situations when the Order ceases to have binding effect: first, the Emergency Arbitrator him or
herself may terminate or annul the Order pursuant to art.6(8) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. 606  Secondly, the Tribunal has
the same right to do so pursuant to art.29(3) of the Rules.
Footnotes

Duration of Binding Effect of Order, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406964 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
606
See para.29-110.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
