Chapter 12 - Conclusions, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291552 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 12 - Conclusions
A Practical Guide to Effective Dispute Resolution: Methods & Clauses 1st Ed.
Mainwork
Conclusions
Chapter 12 - Conclusions
Considering more effective dispute resolution methods
12-001
The primary role of a dispute resolution lawyer is to resolve disputes. This may seem obvious but not all lawyers understand
this and, as a result, it is not uncommon for new disputes to be created out of existing ones. One of the reasons for this is that the
court process has rigid and formal procedures, and its harsh powers provide a field for more disputes to arise out of interpretation
of those procedures and to encourage unfair tactics on either side to use any deviation from procedures to their advantage.
Conversely, there are a broad range of other, more effective, dispute resolution methods that promote and encourage more
flexibility, and aim at arriving at a fairer resolution of the dispute by considering parties interests, rather than their legal positions.
These other options give more discretion to the parties, or an impartial third party, to resolve the dispute depending on the
circumstances of the matter. In this sense, the role of a third party, being an arbitrator, mediator or expert, is to facilitate the
process of resolving the dispute between the parties, rather than just imposing a decision without considering the fairness of
the outcome.
A flexible approach to effective dispute resolution allows the parties to avoid strict and inflexible rules, so avoiding the potential
corresponding litigious behaviour that often accompanies litigation. If the parties are both in favour of a more collaborative
approach, this maximises the prospects of achieving a fair and balanced outcome. If all participants adopt the principles of
this approach, which underpins the essence of effective dispute resolution and differentiates it from traditional litigation, then
the dispute resolution process itself becomes less daunting, less risky and less costly. This then provides benefits, rather than
detriments, to the parties and their future business relationship.
Towards successful resolution of disputes
12-002
Ideally, by going through a dispute resolution process, the parties should achieve a better understanding of each other’s positions,
struggles, needs and interests. This facilitates resolution of the issues between them in the most fair and forward-thinking
manner. In turn, this can lead to resolution of a dispute on a mutually acceptable and satisfactory basis with a potential for future
collaboration and further development of their business relationships.
Inevitably, such an outcome will most likely require the parties to reach a compromise with “success” sometimes being an
agreement with which the parties are “equally happy” (rather than adopting a winner-takes-all position). In turn, the benefit of
this is that it can encourage growth and success of their businesses, rather than leading to the failure and detriment that a more
contentious stance would offer, if the dispute were to be resolved by litigation.
This positive outcome of the future development of their business relationship, embracing the growth and success it could lead
to, should be the ultimate goal of the parties, their lawyers and any neutral third party (a mediator, arbitrator or an expert)
involved in the dispute.
As court cases get the most attention, the general public are not so aware that this happens more often than they think. As
the successful negotiations, mediation, expert determination or arbitrations, with perceived fair outcomes, are not made public

Chapter 12 - Conclusions, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291552 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
and are often deliberately made confidential, this lack of awareness can serve to perpetuate the myth that going to court is the
preferred approach.
Dispute as an opportunity to resolve issues
12-003
It follows that contract drafters or business managers should try not to see a dispute as their failure or fault. Instead, it should
ideally be considered as a natural business process of parties’ having some unexpected disagreement and attempting to find the
best solution to it through better understanding of each other’s needs.
In this way, any dispute is an opportunity for them to resolve the issues they face and to improve their business and their
relationship with a focus on achieving it by fair means. The role of contract drafters, business managers and all participants in
a dispute resolution process should be to help and promote the achievement of this goal through the means and tools available
to them.
This book has given recommendations as to how to draft dispute resolution clauses to try to reduce the risks of further escalation
of disputes and satellite issues being litigated between the parties. It does not mean that those risks will or could all be avoided.
There will always be lawyers and parties who try to escalate a dispute to take advantage of each other’s weaknesses to win their
cases. However, such focus may not lead them to the best resolution of their dispute in the most effective way. Ultimately, it
may cost them more, by losing their business relationship with the counterparty or being unable to recover all the costs and
time spent on it.
Preventing dispute escalation at the time of contract drafting
12-004
Unfortunately, many lawyers still proceed from the assumption that they have to argue their case in court, or in arbitration,
in a very contentious or aggressive manner. This misses the point of their role being dispute “resolution” lawyers when their
attitudes and behaviour turns them into dispute “escalation” lawyers. It also misses an opportunity to understand each parties’
issues and resolve them in a mutually satisfactory manner, which supports further collaboration and development of business
relations between the parties.
In this regard, contract drafters, normally dealing with the parties before any real disputes arise, are in a better position to draft
the contract in such a way that not only discourages the parties from escalating their disputes later, when they arise, but also
encourages collaboration between the parties to resolve the dispute in the most effective way. That is why giving proper thought
to a dispute resolution clause can be as important as considering other rights and obligations between the parties. Ultimately,
those rights will be protected, and obligations will be imposed and enforced through dispute resolution processes chosen by
the parties.
Emphasising the importance of amicable resolution through drafting
escalation clauses
12-005
It is also important that contract drafters consider the ways they can encourage an amicable resolution of disputes between
the parties. A multi-tiered dispute resolution clause, combining various dispute resolution methods, may serve this purpose in
the best way.
For example, the first tier of a multi-tiered clause could be composed of the parties’ informal and, at some point later,
formal, negotiation processes. Mediation and early neutral evaluation (ENE) can be interjected at any stage of this process.

Chapter 12 - Conclusions, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291552 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
If an agreement is not reached, and the issues involved are of a technical nature, the matter could further proceed to expert
determination. If the issues are broader than that or require a formal award (especially for the purposes of enforcement), the
matter could then escalate to arbitration.
The involvement of arbitration does not necessarily mean a full and formal arbitration process. It could be that, by the time the
matter reaches arbitration, there are very few issues that are left for the tribunal to be resolved. It is important that the parties
focus on those issues rather than attempting to include ones that had already been resolved or could have been resolved during
negotiations, mediation or even expert determination. This will save time and costs to the parties and prevent further escalation
of the dispute between them.
In this way, the dispute resolution clause could be drafted as to encourage the parties to resolve all the issues between them
at the earliest opportunity. Equally, if some issues are remaining, only those issues would proceed to further stages/tiers of the
dispute resolution process. At the same time, an arbitration process could be used, if necessary, to enter a consent award later
on, to make the resolution of the dispute between the parties more formal and easily enforceable around the world. It could also
help some parties to “justify” the dispute resolution result internally through a formal arbitration award being issued, at the same
time, avoiding a lengthy and costly full arbitration process, as well as the uncertainty of the outcome of a tribunal’s decision.
A well drafted escalation clause should be incorporated to discourage the parties from making the first steps of a dispute
resolution process to move immediately to arbitration. By encouraging the parties to focus only on resolving the remaining
issues between them in arbitration, this could keep them focused on the actual resolution of the dispute by not escalating the
dispute immediately to arbitration.
As the litigation process in courts is more formalistic and contentious in nature, it may only encourage the parties to further
escalate the dispute. Whilst in many jurisdictions pre-litigation dispute resolution processes are encouraged, litigation itself is
not suitable for maintaining an ongoing relationship between the parties and it is more likely to destroy it rather than to improve
it. This situation arises through the imposition of a decision undoubtedly in accordance with the law, but not necessarily a fair
one (or perceived to be fair by both parties). Therefore, contract drafters should try to avoid resorting to litigation, unless it
becomes unavoidable or there are some other particular reasons why arbitration and other dispute resolution processes cannot
be used instead.
Pre-empting issues at the time of drafting
12-006
It is important to consider the dispute resolution issues at the start of the business relationship, as this should be the point at
which the parties are most cooperative and willing to compromise in order to reach agreement. It should also be recognised that
contractual relationships often have an imbalance of power between the parties.
If a dispute is encountered, this can mean that one party is more willing to settle via compromise than the other. In drafting
an escalation or hybrid resolution clause, this can be considered in the wording to ensure that all parties, no matter what their
relative strengths, or how deep their pockets, are required to follow an agreed escalation process, envisaging that non-binding
methods of dispute resolution would be attempted first, before parties proceed to any binding methods to resolve their dispute.
The right mindset towards effective dispute resolution
12-007
From the start of their relationship the parties should endeavour to adopt the right mindset towards dispute resolution. The
parties should be encouraged to recognise the original goals and objectives that brought them together to develop their business
relationship to be of paramount importance. If this perception is established from the start, and continues when any difficulties
arise between them, this would set the basis for the right mindset towards resolution of this dispute, rather than its escalation.

Chapter 12 - Conclusions, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291552 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
It is equally important to maintain a collaborative approach and business objectives not just at the time of drafting of contracts,
but also at any dispute resolution stage. Aiming towards resolution and adopting an outcome-oriented approach in their dispute
resolution strategy would help them to ensure that the dispute is resolved effectively from both time and costs perspective.
Equally, it is important not to be driven by an over-legalistic and antagonistic approach, to which parties are sometimes pushed
towards by involving external lawyers in their dispute. Lawyers should be there to help to resolve dispute, not to escalate it at
the disproportionate level of costs. Both lawyers and the parties (sometimes driven by emotions, rather than reason) may be
tempted to fall into this trap. However, the right focus on business relationship and effective resolution of the dispute should
be able to counteract that.
Understanding and embracing the psychology of dispute resolution
12-008
The parties should recognise the role that psychology plays in forming attitudes and making any decisions in the dispute
resolution process. Court litigation proceedings, although typically formal, legalistic and dry, are often driven by the emotions
of parties, who are desperate to prove their points; witnesses, who are concerned about their participation in the hearing; and
the dispute itself, the lawyers and their ego. Issues arriving from psychology can also surface with judges or arbitrators, who
may have their pre-established views and beliefs and their own understanding of fairness, which may or may not correspond to
what parties perceive as fair. The parties and triers of fact are often constrained by what remedies the law can offer and what
legal basis is given for a decision to be taken. As such, legal proceedings are not always perceived as bringing a fair outcome
despite the good intentions of the parties.
Arbitration proceedings can address some of these problems by building on the flexibility of the procedure and, perhaps, better
opportunities to arrive at a fair outcome due to the parties being able to control the process and choose their tribunal. However,
arbitrations are not immune from the same problems that litigation has.
There is much more flexibility to recognise parties’ psychology, emotions, and the interests that drive them in alternative dispute
resolution (ADR). In non-binding dispute resolution processes, this has the potential to help achieve more tailored solutions,
some which may not often be available through litigation, or even possible for a court to order. Negotiations, mediation, early
neutral evaluation and their blended forms offer many more options for the parties to arrive at a mutually beneficial outcome,
addressing the psychological drivers of their behaviour and perhaps removing some psychological constraints that litigation
offers, especially when they affect the decisions of a judge or arbitral tribunal.
Embracing different dispute resolution methods and their hybrid forms
12-009
When using non-binding dispute resolution methods, it is important for the parties to embrace the flexibility that these methods
offer in terms of their procedure, approach and participation of a neutral third party. It is also important to understand that the
procedures used in traditional dispute resolution methods can be mixed and matched to fit the needs of a particular dispute. The
use of hybrid or blended dispute resolution processes is not uncommon and is becoming more and more popular.
Dispute resolution methods differ due to their essential characteristics, including participation of a neutral third party in the
process, the neutral offering or not offering solutions, availability of separate sessions with the neutral for each party to explore
their case in a confidential manner, a fair assessment of the parties’ cases by the neutral, the number of rounds, and the period
of time over which it can take place.
A dispute resolution method, or methods selected by the parties do not need to be called by one name or another. If the parties
avoid getting hung up on the label for the process they start following, they can select a tailored approach to their needs. This can
include choosing one neutral for a blend of methods or methods deploying a number of neutrals with different roles, who could
lead each of the stages of the dispute resolution process, progressively leading to a binding method, for example, arbitration.

Chapter 12 - Conclusions, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291552 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Even after a binding process has started, the parties can agree to stay it for the purposes of further exploration of settlement
options through other methods or approaches (whether returning to the same non-binding neutral or not).
During the whole dispute resolution process, it is important for the parties to keep an open mind and be agile as to how the
dispute and its resolution evolves and what tools they can use to achieve the designed outcome. This attitude towards resolution,
rather than escalation, of a dispute, has a much higher chance of helping the parties to succeed and resolve the dispute in the
most effective way.
Technological advances facilitating dispute resolution
12-010
Parties can also benefit from technological advances that support a dispute resolution process, making it more efficient and cost-
effective. There are a number of established online dispute resolution (ODR) platforms that have been operating (and evolving)
for more than 20 years. An open mindset should allow the parties to be creative about the process they choose. In addition,
at a basic level, technology can help the parties to save costs and time on traveling for the sessions and having them online/
remotely instead.
Perhaps the most promising and advanced change in the dispute resolution process, which may overhaul it completely, is the
development of artificial intelligence (AI). AI has the potential not only to help the lawyers run their cases in court or arbitration
and prepare a case for negotiation and arbitration more efficiently, but it can also help them or a neutral third party to resolve
the dispute itself. There are early developments already operating and, ultimately, AI may become established as a third-party
neutral, rather than a human, not only helping the parties to resolve their dispute by achieving a fair settlement, but also becoming
an arbitrator or even a judge for at least some disputes.
Although some of the technological advances are still waiting to be accepted by parties, regulators and courts, others are already
successfully implemented in the dispute resolution process where they have been proven to help streamline the process and
make it more effective.
Avoiding risky litigation
12-011
No matter what tools the parties decide to adopt, be it AI, online platforms, the use of human third-party neutrals to get parties
together, offer solutions or assess their case, or just negotiating at different levels, these all have the potential to ultimately lead
to the settlement or at least reduction of issues remaining between the parties to resolve. It may well be that a limited scope
arbitration or, in the event of technical issues, expert determination, would then bring the dispute to finality.
What is important is to consider all modalities available before the parties decide to proceed to court. Litigation is much more
risky than other means, not only because parties cannot be sure whether they can win the case, but also because of costs
consequences, as well as the effect of litigation on business relationships. More often than not, these are not recoverable after
one party wins and the other loses. There is much more to be lost in court than there is by attempting (even if unsuccessfully) to
resolve their dispute by settlement. Court litigation is notoriously unpredictable with uncertainty of the outcome both in terms
of the proceedings, but also as to whether the winning party will actually receive what they want.
Recognising this should form part of the dispute resolution strategy from the start, and the costs-benefit analysis and business
risks assessment should be considered before anything else. Investing in costly litigation is a high-risk investment, and rarely
leads to very good returns for the party itself. There is also the potential for hidden conflict as extended litigation can be good
for lawyers’ bonuses, or third-party funders, but this is at the cost of one or other of the parties.

Chapter 12 - Conclusions, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291552 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
The most effective way forward for dispute resolution
12-012
Bearing all the above in mind, the question is what makes dispute resolution effective? The simple answer is that effective
dispute resolution depends on the right attitude of the parties to the dispute resolution process. There are plenty of tools and
methods available to the parties to resolve the dispute in the most effective way. There are third party neutrals to help this process
and if they have enough experience in different methods and are agile enough to use them, the parties’ dispute can typically be
settled in a more effective way, no matter how complex it is. The key is a flexible, collaborative approach, which focuses on the
outcome and aims at resolving the dispute and not escalating it. The most effective resolution of a dispute is in the parties’ hands.
The future of dispute resolution and relationships between the parties
12-013
The future of dispute resolution is going to be significantly influenced by the willingness of the parties to be flexible, change their
pre-existing ways of resolving disputes, and re-evaluate their initial way of approaching disputes and their business decisions
to move from a lawyer/court directed approach towards an outcome-based approach.
In the consumer sector, a customer can be left more satisfied after their complaint is handled fairly and efficiently than if the
issue has never occurred in the first place (a phenomenon called “service recovery paradox”). 1 , 2  The same principle applies
to the business-to-business dispute resolution process. After the parties’ dispute is resolved fairly and efficiently, they may
feel more satisfied, and their business relationships may start on the new grounds after a “reset” through an effective dispute
resolution process.
The key is to see dispute resolution as an opportunity to address misunderstanding, move away from the differences, find
common ground and grow business relationships.
Technology and AI in particular is the biggest force that will drive a change in parties’ perceptions of what constitutes a dispute
and how it should be resolved. It is inevitable that AI is going to change the way businesses work. The re-evaluation of how AI
can help to reduce spending on legal services, including dispute resolution, is bound to reach the boards of both small, medium-
size and large businesses. At this stage, a re-evaluation of how disputes are resolved is also likely to take place.
If a cost-effective and time-efficient approach is adopted, with the support of AI and other technological tools, it is almost
inevitable that dispute resolution will have a different shape to what lawyers now know (at the time of writing). More and
more legal practitioners, especially neutrals, are actively and successfully applying non-binding dispute resolution methods
and advocating for this approach. The Chartered Institute of Arbitrators (CIArb) has expanded its scope to encompass a range
of dispute resolution methods in their activities and training and promote effective dispute resolution globally. 3  This trend is
likely to be followed by others. The forward-thinking approach towards effective dispute resolution and application of AI is
also increasingly voiced by those on the top of the judiciary. 4
There is a clear move from those who are active in the dispute resolution area towards effective dispute resolution methods,
supported by technological advances. This move is likely to be joined by the parties themselves, their managers and in-house
teams. The future of dispute resolution lies in the way that technology and businesses are going to re-shape the legal services
market and dispute resolution in particular. What is clear is that this move will be directed towards effective dispute resolution,
not against it.
Footnotes

Chapter 12 - Conclusions, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291552 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
1
Wayne Huang et al., “How Customer Service Can Turn Angry Customers into Loyal Ones”, Harvard Business Review,
16 January 2018.
2
This principle is incorporated into Amazon’s strategy and culture of proactive solution-oriented focus. See Y.
Helmy, M. Ashraf and L. Abdelhamid, “The Role of Effective Complaint Handling for Business Sustainability: A
Review Paper” (2023) 18 International Journal of Global Business and Competitiveness 54, https://link.springer.com/
article/10.1007/s42943-023-00088-w.
3
See CIArb, CIArb Strategy 2021 to 2023 (2020), pp.1, 4, https://www.ciarb.org/strategy/.
4
The Right Hon. Sir Geoffrey Vos, Speech, “Transforming the work of lawyers and judges”, AI Conference 2024:
Transforming the Legal Landscape (The Manchester Law Society, 8 March 2024).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
