Section G. - Proceedings After the Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638661 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section G. - Proceedings After the Award
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 9 - Award
Section G. - Proceedings After the Award
9. 192
Exceptions to the general rule that an arbitral tribunal becomes functus officio on the issue of a final award arise from specific
provisions of the national system of law governing the arbitration, from the parties’ arbitration agreement, or from any rules
of arbitration adopted by them. 249
9. 193
These exceptions typically include applications to interpret an award or correct typographical or calculating errors. Corrections
are self-evidently limited in scope. The problem with ‘interpretation’, as opposed to ‘correction’, of an award is that it is
sometimes used to re-open decisions reached by the tribunal in the guise of an ‘interpretation’.
(a) Under national law
9. 194
Many systems of national law with developed arbitral rules permit the correction of minor clerical or typographical errors in
awards, a so-called ‘slip rule’, either at the request of one or both of the parties, or by the arbitral tribunal on its own initiative.
For example, in England, this power is conferred expressly by statute. Section 57 of the Arbitration Act 1996 provides:
Section 57
(1) The parties are free to agree on the powers of the tribunal to correct an award or make an additional award.
(2) If or to the extent there is no such agreement, the following provisions apply.
(3) The tribunal may on its own initiative or on the application of a party:
(a) correct an award so as to remove any clerical mistake or error arising from an accidental slip or
omission or clarify or remove any ambiguity in the award, or
(b) make an additional award in respect of any claim (including a claim for interest or costs) which was
presented to the tribunal but was not dealt with in the award.
These powers shall not be exercised without first affording the other parties a reasonable opportunity to make
representations to the tribunal. 250
[ … ]
9. 195
The US Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 (FAA) provides that the relevant district court may make an order modifying or
correcting errors. 251  The grounds for modifying or correcting an award include ‘evident material miscalculation’, ‘evident
material mistake’, and ‘imperfect[ions] in a manner of form not affecting the merits’. 252  Similar provisions are contained in
the arbitration statutes of many individual states in the United States, some of which also permit corrections and modifications

Section G. - Proceedings After the Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638661 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
on the initiative of the arbitral tribunal. Additionally, in some countries, the arbitral tribunal may complete the award where a
determination of a claim, or ruling as to costs, has been omitted. 253  The Model Law imposes a thirty-day time limit within
which requests to correct ‘any errors in computation, any clerical or typographical errors or any errors of similar nature’ may
be made. 254
(b) Under rules of arbitration
9. 196
Exceptions to the general rule of functus officio vary under different sets of arbitration rules. The LCIA Rules contain an express
power for the arbitral tribunal to correct ‘any error in computation, any clerical or typographical error, any ambiguity or any
mistake of a similar nature’, but not to make interpretations of awards. 255  Prior to 1998, the ICC Rules did not mention either
correction or interpretation. This was presumably on the basis that the process of scrutiny under Article 21 of the previous
version of the Rules should be sufficient to ensure that all mistakes would be identified. However, this absence was addressed
some time ago, and the 2021 Rules contain the following provision:
On its own initiative, the arbitral tribunal may correct a clerical, computational or typo-graphical error, or any
errors of similar nature contained in an award, provided such correction is submitted for approval to the Court
within 30 days from notification of the award by the Secretariat pursuant to Article 35(1).
Any application of a party for the correction of an error of the kind referred to in Article 36(1), or for the
interpretation of an award, must be made to the Secretariat within 30 days from receipt of the award by such
party. 256
9. 197
Similarly, the SCC Rules contain an explicit provision granting the arbitral tribunal power to give a written interpretation of its
award at the request of a party, in addition to the power to correct clerical errors:
Within 30 days of receiving an award, a party may, upon notice to the other party, request that the Arbitral Tribunal
correct any clerical, typographical or computational errors in the award, or provide an interpretation of a specific
point or part of the award. After giving the other party an opportunity to comment on the request, and if the
Arbitral Tribunal considers the request justified, it shall make the correction or provide the interpretation within
30 days of receiving the request. 257
9. 198
The UNCITRAL Rules contain powers for the arbitral tribunal to correct its award, issue additional awards, and interpret its
award (if so requested) within narrow time limits. The correction of an award (in relation to clerical or typographical errors)
may take place either at the request of the party or on the initiative of the arbitral tribunal itself. 258  Yet the arbitral tribunal
may issue an interpretation only at the request of a party, not on its own initiative. 259  Similarly, the arbitral tribunal may issue
an additional award only at the request of a party. 260  The purpose of the provision relating to additional awards is to ensure
that the arbitrators may complete their mission if they have omitted from their award decisions in relation to any of the claims
presented in the proceedings. Time limits for complying with each of these provisions are set out in the relevant Articles. In
each case, the provisions of Article 34, relating to the formalities required in making an award, must be observed.
9. 199
Where the arbitral tribunal is asked to issue an interpretation of its award, 261  whether under the UNCITRAL Rules or
otherwise, 262  this may pose difficulties for the tribunal. Its members will have to recapitulate their thinking as best they can
and clarify what is unclear—unless they take the view that the request is without substance and may be dealt with in a summary
manner.
9. 200

Section G. - Proceedings After the Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638661 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
The ICSID Rules go further than those of other arbitral institutions. They permit applications for the award to be interpreted
and revised not only by the original arbitral tribunal, 263  but also, if that arbitral tribunal cannot be reconstituted, by a new one
specially appointed for the purpose. 264  This is a cumbersome procedure, but it appears to be part of the price to be paid for
the self-contained and autonomous nature of ICSID arbitrations, which means that even obvious errors may be corrected only
within the system and not by an outside authority such as a national court. 265
(c) Review procedures other than by national courts
9. 201
Challenging awards in national courts is considered in Chapter 10. However, in a limited number of cases, there may be a prior
review of awards by some other authority. The main instances in which this arises are as follows. First, in certain specialised
types of arbitration, particularly in the commodity trades, there is sometimes provision for either party to appeal to a specially
constituted arbitral appeals tribunal. 266  Secondly, in a small number of countries, parties may raise an objection to an award
before a body other than a national court. Thirdly, in the ICC system, the award must not be signed by the arbitral tribunal until
it has been scrutinised by the ICC Court. This provision states:
Before signing any award, the arbitral tribunal shall submit it in draft form to the Court. The Court may lay down
modifications as to the form of the award and, without affecting the arbitral tribunal’s liberty of decision, may
also draw its attention to points of substance. No award shall be rendered by the arbitral tribunal until it has been
approved by the Court as to its form. 267
9. 202
It calls for two different standards of review: the first is as to form, with respect to which the ICC Court may ‘lay down’
modifications; the second is as to points of substance, which the ICC Court may only ‘draw to the attention’ of the arbitrator.
9. 203
The review of awards by the ICC Court sometimes causes concern to arbitrators, who consider it unnecessary and time-
consuming. It may also arouse concerns on the part of some parties, who fear that the case will be reviewed by a ‘court’ before
which they have had no opportunity of presenting their cases. However, by adopting the Rules, the parties agreed that the ICC
Court should act as the auxiliary of the arbitral tribunal in relation to the form of the award and as adviser to the tribunal in
relation to the substance of the award and they can hardly complain if the ICC Court carries out the functions that they have
empowered it to carry out.
(d) Review of the award by way of settlement
9. 204
After the award has been rendered, parties can also settle a dispute by voluntarily agreeing to vary the terms of the award. In
one study of the record of compliance with, and variation of, awards once rendered, it was found that more than 18 per cent had
been renegotiated post-award to establish final settlement claims. 268  Citing even higher figures, another study found that 40
per cent of corporations negotiated a settlement after the arbitral award was rendered. 269  While more recent statistics are not
available, it seems that parties commonly conclude the matter by entering into a negotiation either to establish terms of payment
or to establish a new settlement, using the award as a bargaining tool.
(e) Publication of awards
9. 205

Section G. - Proceedings After the Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638661 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
A conflict emerged some years ago between the ‘inherent confidentiality’ of the arbitral process and the desire for publication
of awards in the interests of establishing a body of learning that might guide—if not bind—other arbitrators. The prevailing
trend appears to favour publication. Awards of the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal have been comprehensively reported and
have been used as guidance in other arbitrations. The ICDR Rules provide that, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, selected
awards may be made publicly available, with the names of the parties and other identifying features removed. Similarly, as of
1 January 2019, the ICC may publish awards and/or orders, subject to any party’s objection and/or to applicable confidentiality
constraints. 270  In the ICC’s own words, ‘[p]ublicising and disseminating information about arbitration has been one of ICC’s
commitments since its creation and an instrumental factor in facilitating the development of trade worldwide’. 271  Under the
ICSID Rules, excerpts of an award may be published even without the consent of the parties. 272  There are other circumstances
in which, even without the consent of the parties, an award may find its way into the public domain. This may occur, for example,
during court proceedings to challenge or enforce an award, 273  or when a publicly quoted corporation is obliged to disclose in
its published accounts material information relating to its liabilities. 274
9. 206
In a less official context, in a form of post-Soviet legal samizdat, 275  it is becoming increasingly common for awards rendered
in investment treaty arbitrations to be circulated via email and the Internet between practitioners and academics active in the
field. During the second decade of the twenty-first century, online communities sprang up to exchange information and views
on matters related to arbitration and international law. One of the most prominent among these is the Oil Gas Energy Mining
Infrastructure Dispute Management (OGEMID) email list. 276
9. 207
Together with other similar forums and websites, 277  OGEMID informally introduced an era of greater (although haphazard)
transparency within the world of international arbitration. The advantages and disadvantages of transparency versus
confidentiality continue to be debated within the international arbitration community, with many drawing a distinction between
investment treaty arbitration and commercial arbitration arising between parties to private contracts. 278
9. 208
Further, after several years of debate, in 2014 the UNCITRAL Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor–State Arbitration
were promulgated (the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules) in relation to treaties concluded after 1 April 2014, providing for
automatic publication of all submissions, orders, hearing transcripts, and awards in treaty-based UNCITRAL cases (unless the
parties opt-out). 279  In 2017, the Mauritius Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor–State Arbitration entered into
force, applying the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules to all treaty-based arbitrations where both the host state and investor’s
home state are parties to the Convention.
9. 209
At the time of writing, it is still too early to predict the extent to which these recent changes will result in an increased level
of transparency in treaty-based investor–state arbitrations; and whether, in the medium or long term, the trend towards greater
transparency will be extended to international arbitrations between private commercial parties.
Footnotes
249
See Chapter 10.
250
For an example of how and when awards can be considered under s. 57, see Gold Coast Ltd v Naval Gijon SA [2006]
EWHC 1044 (Comm), [2006] Arb LR 381.
251
FAA, s. 11.
252
FAA, s. 11(c). See Hall Street Associates LLC v Mattel Inc. 552 US 576 (2008).
253
For the powers of an arbitral tribunal to correct or complete an award in various national states, see the national reports
in Paulsson and Bosman (eds) ICCA International Handbook on Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International,
1984).

Section G. - Proceedings After the Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638661 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
254
Model Law, Art. 33(1). Such time limit does not apply where an arbitrator makes a ‘conscious choice not to deal with
an issue’, in which case the tribunal is left with an ‘undischarged mandate to complete’ (see Blanalko Pty Ltd v Lysaght
Building Solutions Pty Ltd [2017] VSC 97).
255
LCIA Rules, Art. 27.
256
ICC Rules, Art. 36.1 and 36.2. For a comprehensive survey of applications for correction and/or interpretation of awards
under the ICC Rules that have been made since the original introduction of this provision, see Daly, ‘Correction and
interpretation of arbitral awards under the ICC Rules of Arbitration’ (2002) 13 ICC International Court of Arbitration
Bulletin 1.
257
SCC Rules, Art. 47.
258
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 38.2.
259
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 37.1. Curiously, Art. 37.2 does not contain the express safeguard for the arbitral tribunal that
appears in Art. 39.2, ‘[i]f the arbitral tribunal considers the request for an award or additional award to be justified’. But
common sense dictates that the literal language meaning of Art. 37.2 could not be used to force the arbitral tribunal to
give an interpretation, at least when it considers the request to be spurious.
260
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 39.1.
261
In a case in which one of the authors was an arbitrator, the losing respondent requested an interpretation, but the arbitral
tribunal determined that this was a manifest attempt by that party to cause the arbitral tribunal to review its decision
on the merits of the case.
262
The ICDR Rules, Art. 36, contains similar provisions to those of the UNCITRAL Rules.
263
ICSID Rules, rr. 50-52.
264
ICSID Rules, r. 51(3).
265
For an example of the relevant ICSID Rules in practice, see Marvin Feldman v Mexico, Correction and Interpretation
of the Award, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, IIC 158 (2003).
266
See Chapter 10, paragraph 10.11.
267
ICC Rules, Art. 34.
268
Of 118 cases, 22 had been renegotiated: Naimark and Keer, ‘Post-award experience in international commercial
arbitration’ (2005) 60 Disp Res J 94.
269
Mistelis and Baltag, ‘Recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards and settlement in international arbitration:
Corporate attitudes and practices’ (2008) 19 Am Rev Intl Arb 319, at 324.
270
ICC Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals, 1 January 2021, Pt. IV(C).
271
Ibid., at 56.
272
ICSID Rules, r. 48(4).
273
See, e.g., Emmott v Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd [2008] EWCA Civ 184.
274
See Chapter 2. See also Paulsson and Rawding, ‘The trouble with confidentiality’ (1995) 11 Arb Intl 303.
275
Samizdat, meaning literally ‘self-publishing’, was the clandestine copying and onward distribution of government-
suppressed literature in Soviet states. Individuals who received a copy of a censored text would be expected to make
copies, often by hand, and then to hand those out for further consumption, copying, and distribution.
276
The list, set up by the late Professor Thomas Wälde, has been described as a ‘vehicle where the blue-eyed theorists
meet the rock of reality [… where] theoreticians [can no longer] graze on the prairies of theory in groups of like-minded
people rather than slog it out at the coalface of legal practice’: ‘OGEMID: An exchange practice– theory vehicle’, posted
online at OGEMID, 23 May 2008.
277
See, e.g., https://www.italaw.com.
278
For a discussion of whether such a distinction remains viable in the face of increased public scrutiny of arbitration
as a mainstream dispute resolution process, see Partasides, ‘What has been the “spillover” effect of the transparency
debate on commercial arbitrations?’, in Kalicki and Raouf (eds) Evolution and Adaptation: The Future of International
Arbitration, ICCA Congress Series, Vol. 20 (Kluwer Law, 2019) pp. 699-705.
279
UNCITRAL Transparency Rules, Art. 1.1, 1.2.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
