Article 27 Closing of the Proceedings and Date for..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 27 Closing of the Proceedings and Date for Submission of
Draft Awards
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Article 27 Closing of the Proceedings and Date for Submission of Draft Awards
As soon as possible after the last hearing concerning matters to be decided in an award or the filing of the last authorized
submissions concerning such matters, whichever is later, the arbitral tribunal shall:
 
a) declare the proceedings closed with respect to the matters to be decided in the award; and
 
b) inform the Secretariat and the parties of the date by which it expects to submit its draft award to the Court for
approval pursuant to Article 34.
After the proceedings are closed, no further submission or argument may be made, or evidence produced, with respect to
the matters to be decided in the award, unless requested or authorized by the arbitral tribunal.
27-1
Article 27 deals with the final phase of the arbitration, which is evidenced by the closing of the arbitral proceedings, and which
will lead the Tribunal to issue its (final) award. 436  Before it can do so, it must submit the draft of this award for scrutiny and
approval by the ICC Court. Article 27 organizes the procedure for doing so.
27-2
ICC arbitration is intended to be cost-effective. Accordingly, art.25 requires the Tribunal to establish the facts of the case “within
as short a time as possible”. Article 31(1) provides that ICC arbitrations are to be completed in six months, unless an extension
is granted. Under the Expedited Procedure Provisions, the award is to be issued within six months after the date of the case
management conference. To finalise the award, the Tribunal must be able to impose a cut-off on submission of evidence and
argument by the parties. That is what art.27 is designed to provide. By agreeing to ICC arbitration, the parties are accepting
this basic rule that is typical of civil law systems. The purpose of art.27 is to streamline the proceedings, and also to protect the
arbitral process from being interrupted by late (and unexpected) submissions of a party. Both parties will be advised that they
will, as of the time of the closing of the proceedings, have to expect a decision from the Tribunal.
27-3
Article 27 provides, unlike its predecessor under the 1998 Rules, that the proceedings shall be closed as soon as possible after
the last hearing or last set of authorised submissions. This change was made in the 2012 Rules to expedite proceedings and to
avoid having the Tribunal wait until it finalised an award to close the proceedings. The determination of when it is possible to
close the proceedings will vary. Nevertheless, there is a tendency to only close the proceedings once the Tribunal has had initial
deliberations. Prior to closing the proceedings, the Tribunal should ensure that it has all of the evidence and legal authorities
that the Tribunal considers it needs to finalise an award. This approach is not required by or in conformity with the spirit of
the Rules. A Tribunal may always re-open the proceedings under art.27 if, during deliberations, the Tribunal considers that it
does not have sufficient evidence or legal authority on a point.
27-4
Article 27 also provides that the Tribunal may close the proceedings with respect to the matters to be decided in the award.
Therefore, if the award is to decide solely jurisdictional issues, the Tribunal may close the proceedings with respect to the
jurisdictional issues.

Article 27 Closing of the Proceedings and Date for..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
27-5
In addition, art.27 provides that the Tribunal shall inform the parties as well as the Secretariat of the date by which it anticipates
submitting a draft award for scrutiny pursuant to art.34. A well-organized Tribunal will look into that issue well before the
final hearing or the parties’ final submissions to ensure that it will be able to send sufficient time aside for drafting the award.
To inform the parties of the approximate date of transmittal of the draft award is not only important for managing the parties’
expectations, but also for the Tribunal itself, as it requires it to set realistic milestones. The drafting of an award is normally
the most difficult and time-consuming task for a Tribunal.
27-6
Article 27 relates directly to art.22(4). The Tribunal shall declare the proceedings closed when it is satisfied that each party
has had “a reasonable opportunity to present its case”. Prior to closing the proceedings, the Tribunal should ensure that the due
process requirements of the Rules and the place of arbitration are respected. As discussed under arts 18 and 22, the perception
of what will constitute a reasonable opportunity to present a case will depend to a certain extent on the approach of the national
courts.
27-7
In many instances, especially with smaller or mid-size arbitrations, oral submissions are made and the hearings are closed at the
end of the hearing. In other instances, the parties submit post-hearing briefs either reflecting their final positions or responding
to specific points that have been raised by the Tribunal. In such cases, the Tribunal frequently announces that the proceedings
are closed subject to the submission of the post-hearing briefs and the submissions on costs. Post-hearing briefs are normally
not allowed to contain new factual evidence, but Tribunals may allow and sometimes even solicit legal material in support of
the parties’ legal submissions. Many Tribunals find it helpful to have the post-hearing briefs submitted promptly after the oral
hearings so that the members of the Tribunal can recall it in more detail and (hopefully) get a good analysis of the dispositive
issues and a good basis to structure their award. Frequently, the Tribunal will close the procedure at the end of the evidentiary
hearings and oral argument. At that time, the Tribunal will usually invite the parties to submit their costs at a later date in the
arbitration, as is discussed under art.38.
27-8
With respect to post-hearing briefs, for the authors the best approach is for the Tribunal to put very specific questions to the
parties either immediately after the evidentiary hearings or, if need be, after initial post-hearing submissions. This approach
permits the parties to focus on arguments they may not have sufficiently anticipated or to allow them to clarify a point for the
Tribunal. For the Tribunal to be able to issue such questions, it must, of course already have a clear understanding of the issues
and must have deliberated at least as to the questions to ask.
27-9
Article 27 requires no specific form for closing the proceedings. The Tribunal will normally record its decision in writing, in a
Procedural Order or simply in a letter to the parties. The same result would be achieved if at the end of the hearing the Tribunal
declares the proceedings closed and such declaration is recorded, for instance, by a court reporter’s verbatim transcript. In
practice, it often happens that the Secretariat invites the Tribunal to close the proceedings, once it has received the draft award
from the Tribunal. Such practice defeats somewhat the purpose of art.27. Ideally, however, the Secretariat would be asking
Tribunals at a much earlier point in time whether they consider that the proceedings should be closed, and in the affirmative
to require the Tribunal to inform the parties accordingly.
27-10
Prior to closing the proceedings, many Tribunals ask the parties if they have any objection to the way the proceedings have been
conducted and whether they accept that the proceedings now be closed. This question is intended to cover whether the parties
feel that they have had a reasonable opportunity to present their cases, but also to give the possibility to correct any deficiency
in the proceedings before the award is rendered. 437  If the parties do not object, then they will usually be deemed to have waived
their right to object under art.40. This confirmation may in fact even cover objections that were made prior to the oral hearings.
As the US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit said in the Karaha Bodas case: 438
“In the final award, issued in December 2000, the Tribunal stated that all parties had ‘waived their respective
requests for discovery’ at the conclusion of the hearing. Pertamina asserts that it did not waive its requests for
discovery because the Tribunal denied the request before the hearing, when the discovery could have been of use.

Article 27 Closing of the Proceedings and Date for..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Pertamina ignores the fact that in international commercial arbitration, it is not uncommon to ask for additional
discovery or information after a hearing, to request additional sessions of a hearing to submit more evidence, or
to file posthearing submissions. Rather than renew its requests for discovery into FPL’s willingness to finance
the project or to assert a request for discovery into FPL’s political risk insurance, Pertamina’s counsel expressly
stated that the record had been ‘fully made’ and that he was ‘prepared to rest on the record.’ The record supports
the Tribunal’s conclusion that the discovery requests made before the hearing had been waived. Pertamina did
not ask for discovery into political risk insurance until it filed its Rule 60(b) motion in the district court. The
Tribunal’s denial of a continuance and additional discovery did not prevent Pertamina from presenting its case, so
as to deprive it of a fair hearing. Pertamina presented ample evidence in support of its position that KBC would be
unable to find financing. The Tribunal considered Pertamina’s evidence and gave it considerable weight, awarding
KBC damages substantially lower than the amount it sought.”
27-11
In the Karaha Bodas case, the party’s confirmation therefore covered not only the conduct of the hearings, but arguably the
discovery request prior to the hearings. This type of confirmation of the parties is particularly relevant if a party later argues that
it could have submitted additional evidence or additional argument. The confirmation is less useful if the party subsequently
alleges bias in the conduct of the proceedings, as a party may only waive what the party knows of and some forms of bias
that are not subject to waiver. 439  In addition, such a confirmation places counsel in an awkward position with respect to the
Tribunal. It is submitted that one way to deal with this situation is for counsel to respond confirming that there is no objection
to the conduct of the oral hearings if that is its case, but that counsel maintain its position with respect to procedural matters
that were raised prior to the hearing. 440
27-12
Article 27 provides that parties may make submissions when requested or authorised by the Tribunal. The need for further
submissions may sometimes appear to the Tribunal on very specific points that it is able to fully consider only during the
deliberation stage. It may concern clarification of a factual or legal point. Any such submissions must be made in a manner
that ensures that the other party has the right to comment on them in accordance with due process. The Tribunal is not required
as a general matter to hold further hearings after such submission. If, as may happen in very exceptional circumstances, the
additional submission contains a factual witness statement, then the other party should have the right to test that witness
statement and, depending on the circumstances and the importance of the evidence, a further hearing may be appropriate.
However, in organising a further hearing, the practicalities and costs should be taken into account. Therefore, it may be that a
hearing by video conference or by telephone is adequate and that a hearing in person is not required.
27-13
The circumstances in which the Tribunal may decide to reopen the proceedings and authorise further submissions are varied. 441
With regards to requests by the parties to consider further submissions, the Tribunal will wish to consider the nature and type
of documents, the time that has elapsed since the closing of the proceedings, the reasons for the late submission, and the impact
the admission of the new documents may have on the proceedings, when deciding to reopen the proceedings with respect to
such documents. The classic circumstance where late-filed documents may be admitted is when new evidence arises that was
not available to the parties previously and which is material to the resolution of the dispute. For example, in a case involving
the validity of patented and unpatented technology, a Tribunal in an unreported award permitted further submissions after the
patent had been held presumptively invalid. These further submissions should not permit a party to re-argue the entire case.
In another unreported award, an arbitrator declined to permit expert evidence of damages when both parties had argued the
damages point extensively in their memorials.
27-14
As mentioned, the Tribunal may, during its deliberations, conclude that certain matters have not been covered adequately for
whatever reason. In such a case, the desire to do justice has to be reconciled with the need to complete the arbitration. Frequently,
Tribunals resolve such issues based on the burden of proof: it is up to the party who has the burden of proof to satisfy that
burden or its claim fails.
27-15

Article 27 Closing of the Proceedings and Date for..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
Moreover, when the Tribunal reopens the hearing on a given point at its own initiative, this may provide the parties a clear
hint in what direction the Tribunal seems to be going. This route is therefore not always appropriate, but may nevertheless in
some cases be the better course of action.
27-16
Article 27 requires the Tribunal to provide the Secretariat and the parties with an approximate date for the submission of the
draft award for scrutiny when the proceedings are closed. Article 27 was inserted to permit the parties, Secretariat, and thus
the ICC Court, to better monitor the progress in rendering the award, and the parties to know better by when they can actually
expect the award. The Tribunal may inform the parties once it has sent its draft award to the Secretariat. Whether the Tribunal
does or not, upon receipt of the draft award, the Secretariat will normally promptly inform the parties (and the Tribunal) that
the draft will now be scrutinized at one of the Court’s next Sessions. The Secretariat never commits at which session this will
be the case, although it endeavours to have it scrutinized within three to four weeks of its receipt. If the draft is to be submitted
to a Special Committee, which typically are held once a month on the last Thursday of the month, the delay may be somewhat
longer. 442  After scrutiny, the Secretariat then informs the parties and the Tribunal that the award was approved, or, as the case
may be, that it will be further scrutinized at one of the Court’s next Sessions. 443
27-17
In a laudable effort to apply the same rigor that it is expecting from arbitrators to itself, the Court may decide to reduce its
administrative expenses by up to 20 per cent if the scrutiny process is delayed for reasons other than by circumstances that are
beyond the Court’s control. 444
27-18
There is no sanction for failing to submit an award by the date indicated by the Tribunal. 445  However, due to ongoing pressure
in the arbitral community as to the delays of arbitrators in handing their draft awards to the ICC, 446  the ICC Court has taken
steps under the chairmanship of President Alexis Mourre that may penalise arbitrators financially if they delay the submission
of the draft award. As such, sole arbitrators are expected to submit a draft award within two months and three-member tribunals
within three months after the last substantive hearing, on matters to be decided in the award or the filing of the last written
submissions concerning such matters (excluding cost submissions), whatever is later. 447
27-19
Arbitrators were always expected to render their decisions expeditiously, but rarely if ever were they penalised in the past in
case of substantial delays, and only rarely rewarded if they acted particularly swiftly. 448  The ICC Court has now acted to lower
an arbitrator’s fees when the draft award is submitted after the applicable deadline. However, an arbitrator will not be penalised
if the delay is attributable to factors beyond the arbitrator’s control or due to exceptional circumstances. 449
27-20
Admittedly, deliberations in a three-member Tribunal may prove to be difficult and may oblige the president to take a cautious
approach as regards informing the Secretariat by which date the draft award will be submitted, as long as he has the support
of the co-arbitrators in that respect. 450  The deliberations of the Tribunal are discussed in detail under art.32. 451  They may
begin in an informal fashion during the evidentiary hearings when the Tribunal will discuss the evidence. Further deliberations
may follow immediately after the hearings. Part of the deliberations must be with respect to the question whether to declare
the proceedings closed, and if so as of when, as this is a basic decision of the Tribunal. Once the president of the Tribunal has
provided a first draft of the co-arbitrators, the latter will review it and send their comments back to the president, who will
generate then a second, but not necessarily the final draft. The arbitrators may of course still comment on any points that remain
open at that stage. All in all, this can be a very time-consuming process, which should not be underestimated by the ICC Court
and/or parties, nor by the president of the tribunal, who when preparing the first draft needs to build in sufficient time for his
co-arbitrators to be in a position to react in a timely manner.
Footnotes

Article 27 Closing of the Proceedings and Date for..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
436
The 2021 Rules have left art.27 unchanged from the 2017 Rules.
437
See Swiss Federal Supreme Court, decision 4A_544/2014 of 24 February 2015, [2017] ASA Bull. Vol.35 No.2, pp.443,
448, which stated that it is an abuse of right to wait until the annulment action to raise a procedural objection that could
have been raised during the arbitration, also available on https://www.swissarbitrationdecisions.com [accessed 28 April
2021].
438
Karaha Bodas Co LLC v Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gas Bumi Negara, 364 F.3d 274 (5th Cir. 2004);
(2004) YBCA Vol.XXIX, p.1262.
439
Parties may hesitate to raise procedural issues immediately prior to deliberation of the Tribunal on the merits. In some
instances, the circumstances may act to vitiate any waiver argument. If the Tribunal has adopted a procedure with the
consent of the parties, the situation is quite different from one where the Tribunal has adopted a procedure over the
objection of the party and then seeks at the end of the proceedings a confirmation that the party has no objection to
the procedure.
440
In the Karaha Bodas case, the discovery issue was apparently raised during the enforcement proceedings. If a party
has made a disclosure request and the Tribunal has ruled and rejected it, then it is difficult to see a justification for the
Tribunal to ask for a waiver of rights at the end of the hearing. The rejection was the Tribunal’s decision and the Tribunal
is required to meet the requirements of due process.
441
For instance, art.38(2) of the ICSID Rules is rather specific on this point, when it states: “(2) Exceptionally, the Tribunal
may, before the award has been rendered, reopen the proceeding on the ground that new evidence is forthcoming of
such a nature as to constitute a decisive factor, or that there is a vital need for clarification on certain specific points”.
More generally, see Taylor and Baruti, “Reopening The Case After The Hearing—To What Extent And Under What
Circumstances Should It Be Allowed?” in ASA Special Series No.29, September 2007, The Resolution of the Dispute—
from the Hearing to the Award, Conference of 26 January 2007 in Geneva, p.8 with references to cases of the Iran-United
States Claims Tribunal. Kalderimis, Love, et al., “ICSID Arbitration Rules, Chapter IV, Arbitration Rule 38 [Closure of
the proceeding]”, in Mistelis, Concise International Arbitration, 2nd edn (Kluwer Law International, 2015) p.316.
442
2021 ICC Note, para.168.
443
2021 ICC Note, para.166.
444
2021 ICC Note, para.170.
445
See Bühler & Jarvin, op. cit., para.17, at p.251.
446
On that point, see the proposals for fee reductions made in 2005 by Bühler, “Cost of arbitration: some further
considerations” in Liber Amicorum in honour of Robert Briner, op. cit., at p.182. The author stated then that for a variety
of reasons it was unlikely that the ICC Court would implement such a policy. It is gratifying to see that some 10 years
later it did.
447
2021 ICC Note, para.153, Part IXA, Doc.3.1.
448
To the extent that the ICC Court has fixed the advance on costs on the basis of average fees, there is normally no money
left for rewarding the arbitrator with fees exceeding the average.
449
2021 ICC Note, paras 152-156, which also detail how the penalty will be calculated, Part IX A.
450
See Reiner, “Le Règlement d’Arbitrage de la CCI, Version 1998” (1998) Rev. Arb. No.1, p.25 at p.60.
451
See para.32-4 and following.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
