Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 3 - Applicable Laws
Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance
(a) Introduction
3. 105
When questions of procedure have been settled, the principal task of the arbitral tribunal is to establish the material facts of
the dispute. It does this by examining the agreement between the parties, by considering other relevant documents (including
correspondence, minutes of meetings, and so on), and by hearing witnesses, if necessary. The arbitral tribunal then builds its
award on this foundation of facts, making its decision either on the basis of the relevant law or exceptionally, and then only if
expressly authorised by the parties, on the basis of what seems to be fair and reasonable in all of the circumstances.
3. 106
Once the relevant facts have been established, the arbitral tribunal may not need to go outside the confines of the agreement
originally made between the parties in order to determine the dispute. This agreement, particularly in international commercial
transactions, will generally be quite detailed. For example, international construction contracts run to many hundreds of closely
printed pages, accompanied by detailed drawings and specifications. Properly understood, such an agreement will generally
make clear what the parties intended, what duties and responsibilities they each assumed, and therefore which of them must be
held liable for any failure of performance that has occurred.
3. 107
But, as already stated, an agreement intended to create legal relations does not exist in a legal vacuum. It is supported by a
system of law that is generally known as ‘the substantive law’, ‘the applicable law’, or ‘the governing law’ of the contract. 150
These terms all denote the particular system of law that governs the interpretation and validity of the contract, the rights and
obligations of the parties, the mode of performance, and the consequences of breaches of the contract. 151
3. 108
Changes in the law applicable to the contract may bring about changes in the contract itself. For instance, a country may enact
currency regulations; these regulations will then apply to contracts that are governed by the law of that country. This happened
in a case in which the delivery of bearer bonds to their lawful owner was refused because, under the law of then Czechoslovakia,
it had become illegal for the bonds to be delivered without the consent of the Central Bank. The Central Bank refused that
consent. The owner of the bonds sued for their delivery, but was unsuccessful:
If the proper law of the contract is the law of Czechoslovakia, that law not merely sustains but, because it sustains,
may also modify or dissolve the contractual bond. The currency law is not part of the contract, but the rights and
obligations under the contract are part of the legal system to which the currency law belongs. 152
Accordingly, it is not enough to know what agreement the parties have made. It is also essential to know what law is applicable
to that agreement. In a purely domestic contract, the applicable law will usually be that of the country concerned. However,
where the contract is in respect of an international transaction, the position is more complicated: there may then be two, or more,
different national systems of law capable of qualifying as the substantive law of the contract, and—although it is important
not to exaggerate the possibilities—these different national systems may contain contradictory rules of law on the particular
point or points in issue.

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
3. 109
People who cross a national frontier on foot or by car, passport in hand, realise that they are moving from one country to another.
The more percipient travellers may also realise that they are moving from one legal system to another—and indeed that what
is lawful in one country is not necessarily so in another.
3. 110
The transition from one legal system to another is less apparent, or at least more easily forgotten, when national frontiers are
crossed by electronic signals from telephones or computers. For example, an oil trader in New York may enter into an agreement
by telephone to buy crude oil on the spot market in Rotterdam, for shipment to a refinery in Germany. A bullion dealer in London
may buy gold by an email from Zurich for delivery to a bank in Italy, on the basis that payment is to be made by an irrevocable
letter of credit drawn on a bank in Chicago. These transactions cross national frontiers as unmistakably as travellers by road or
train. Although there are no physical frontiers to go through, complex questions of law may still arise because of the crossing of
national boundaries. Transactions such as these take place constantly; and rules of law govern each transaction. Yet problems
still arise, first, in identifying what law applies, and secondly, in dealing with any conflict between the applicable laws.
(b) Autonomy of the parties
3. 111
It is generally recognised that parties to an international commercial agreement are free to choose for themselves the law (or the
legal rules) applicable to that agreement. 153  The doctrine of party autonomy, which was first developed by academic writers
and then adopted by national courts, has gained extensive acceptance in national systems of law: 154
[D]espite their differences, common law, civil law and socialist countries have all equally been affected by the
movement towards the rule allowing the parties to choose the law to govern their contractual relations. This
development has come about independently in every country and without any concerted effort by the nations
of the world; it is the result of separate, contemporaneous and pragmatic evolutions within the various national
systems of conflict of laws. 155
3. 112
The doctrine has also found expression in international conventions, such as the Rome I Regulation. 156  The Rome I Regulation,
which is applicable to contractual obligations within the European Union (EU), accepts as a basic principle the right of parties
to a contract to choose, expressly or by implication, the law that is to govern their contractual relationship. 157
3. 113
If national courts are prepared (as most of them are) to recognise the principle of party autonomy in the choice of the law
applicable to a contract, then, a fortiori, arbitral tribunals should also be prepared to do so. An international arbitral tribunal
owes its existence to the agreement of the parties and, in applying the law chosen by the parties, an arbitral tribunal is simply
carrying out their agreement.
(i) Recognition by international conventions
3. 114
Both international conventions and the model rules on international arbitration confirm that the parties are free to choose for
themselves the law applicable to their contract. For example, the ICSID Convention provides that ‘[t]he Tribunal shall decide
a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties’. 158  The UNCITRAL Rules provide that ‘[t]he
arbitral tribunal shall apply the rules of law designated by the parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute’. 159  And,

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
amongst the rules of arbitral institutions, 160  the ICC Rules provide that: ‘[t]he parties shall be free to agree upon the rules
of law to be applied by the arbitral tribunal to the merits of the dispute’. 161  As one commentator has stated:
There are few principles more universally admitted in private international law than that referred to by the
standard terms of the ‘proper law of the contract’—according to which the law governing the contract is that
which has been chosen by the parties, whether expressly or (with certain differences or variations according
to the various systems) tacitly. 162
(ii) Time of choice
3. 115
At its origin, the rule of party autonomy related to the freedom of the parties to choose the applicable law at the time of
making their contract. It now extends (under the international conventions and rules cited) to the right of the parties to choose
the law as it is to be applied at the time of the dispute.
3. 116
It is logical to allow the parties to choose the law that is to govern their contract at the time when they make it. In their
contract, the parties set out the rights and duties that they undertake to uphold towards each other. It is appropriate that they
should, at the same time, refer to the system of law by which that contract is to be governed, because that law forms an
essential element of the bargain between them.
3. 117
There is less logic in allowing the parties to choose the applicable law once a dispute has arisen and yet, in practice, it seems
that parties may do so, even if their choice of law differs from that which they had chosen previously. Indeed, the Rome I
Regulation makes express provision for this. 163  If any justification for this delayed choice (or even change) of law is sought
in legal philosophy, it must lie more generally in the concept of the autonomy of the parties. Parties are generally free to vary
the terms of their contract by agreement; in the same way, they should be free to vary by agreement the law applicable to
a dispute arising out of that contract.
(iii) Restrictions on party autonomy
3. 118
For lawyers who practise in the resolution of international trade disputes and who are accustomed to wending their way
through a maze of national laws, the existence of a general transnational rule of law supporting the autonomy of the parties is
almost too good to be true. The natural inclination is to ask whether there are any restrictions on the rule, and if so, what? 164
3. 119
The answer is that there may be limited restrictions on the rule, designed to ensure that the choice of law is bona fide and is
not contrary to public policy. Thus the Rome I Regulation, for example, does not allow the choice of a foreign law to override
the mandatory rules of law of a country towards which all of the factual elements of the contract point—so that, for example,
the choice of a foreign law for the purposes of tax evasion or avoiding competition regulation would not be permissible. 165
Thus, in Soleimany v Soleimany, 166  the English Court of Appeal refused to enforce an award where the transaction was not
illegal under the applicable law, but was illegal under English law.
3. 120
The case concerned a contract between a father and son, which involved the smuggling of carpets out of Iran in breach of
Iranian revenue laws and export controls. The father and son had agreed to submit their dispute to arbitration by the Beth
Din, the Court of the Chief Rabbi in London, which applied Jewish law. Under the applicable Jewish law, the illegal purpose

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
of the contract had no effect on the rights of the parties and the Beth Din proceeded to make an award enforcing the contract.
In declining to enforce the award, the English Court of Appeal stated:
The Court is in our view concerned to preserve the integrity of its process, and to see that it is not abused. The
parties cannot override that concern by private agreement. They cannot by procuring an arbitration conceal that
they, or rather one of them, is seeking to enforce an illegal contract. Public policy will not allow it. 167
(c) The choice of applicable substantive law
3. 121
Subject only to the qualifications of good faith, legality, and no public policy objection, the conventions and rules on arbitration
that have been mentioned make it plain that the parties may choose for themselves the substantive law applicable to the dispute.
Parties to an international commercial agreement should make full and proper use of this freedom, inserting a ‘choice-of-law’
clause into their contract and into any arbitration agreement in that contract.
3. 122
If they fail to do so, it will almost certainly be a matter for regret should a dispute arise, since (as will be seen) the search for
the proper law can be a long and expensive process. A choice-of-law clause may be drawn in very simple terms. It is usually
sufficient to say: ‘This agreement shall in all respects be governed by the law of England’ (or of Singapore, or of the State of
New York, or of any other state that has in place a modern law of contract).
3. 123
The question that then arises is: given a free choice, what system of law should the parties choose as the law applicable to the
dispute? Is their choice limited to the choice of a national system of law, or may it extend beyond this, perhaps to rules of law
such as those of the law merchant (lex mercatoria)? Indeed, are the parties limited to a choice of law or of legal rules? May they
not, for instance, agree that the dispute should be decided according to considerations of equity and good conscience?
3. 124
It is to these questions that attention must now be turned. The choices that may be available to the parties include:
 
i.national law;
 
ii.public international law (including the general principles of law);
 
iii.concurrent laws (and combined laws—the tronc commun doctrine);
 
iv.transnational law (including international development law, the lex mercatoria, codified terms and practices, and trade
usages); and
 
v.equity and good conscience.
(i) National law
3. 125
In most international commercial contracts, including those in which a state or state entity is one of the parties, it is usual for a
given system of law to be chosen as the law applicable to the contract itself. There is much sense in such a choice. Parties who
choose a law to govern their contract, or any subsequent dispute between them, will generally choose an autonomous system
of law. Such a system is not merely a set of general principles or of isolated legal rules; 168  rather, it is an interconnecting,
interdependent collection of laws, regulations, and ordinances, enacted by or on behalf of the state, and interpreted and
applied by the courts. It is a complete legal system, designed to provide an answer to any legal question that might be posed.

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Furthermore, a national system of law will, in principle, be a known and existing system, capable of reasonably accurate
interpretation by experienced practitioners.
3. 126
In law, as in life, there is no certainty. However, a national system of law provides a known (or at least determinable) legal
standard against which the rights and responsibilities of the parties can be measured. In the event of a dispute, the parties can
be advised with reasonable confidence as to their legal position—or, at the very least, they can be given a broad indication of
their chances of success or failure. If, for example, parties to a dispute that is to be heard in Switzerland agree that the arbitral
tribunal shall apply the law of France, then all concerned (arbitrators, parties, and advisers alike) know where they stand.
The arbitrators will know to what system of law they have to refer, if such reference becomes necessary. The parties and
their advisers will be able to evaluate their prospects of success against the known content of French law. They will know,
too, what sort of legal arguments they will have to present and what sort of legal arguments (as to fault, compensation, and
so on) they may be required to address.
Choice of a system of national law
3. 127
The standard arbitration clauses recommended by arbitral institutions, such as the ICC, are usually followed by a note
pointing out that, in addition to incorporating the arbitration clause in their agreement, the parties should also add a ‘choice-
of-law’ clause. In-house lawyers and others who are concerned with the drafting of contracts will invariably do this, so
that in most commercial contracts, it is usual to find an arbitration clause, in addition to a ‘choice-of-law’ clause, which
should also be expressed to cover that arbitration clause.
3. 128
Almost invariably, the law chosen is a national law. This may be because of that law’s connection with the parties to
the contract, or it may simply be because the parties regard it as a system of law that is well suited to governing their
commercial relations. Indeed, many contracts incorporate the choice of a particular country’s law, although they have no
connection with that country. For example, commodity contracts, shipping and freight contracts, and contracts of insurance
often contain a choice of English law, because the commercial law of England is considered to reflect, and to be responsive
to, the needs of modern international commerce. For similar reasons, many major reinsurance contracts contain a choice
of the law of the State of New York.
3. 129
In an ideal world, almost any national system of law should be suitable, as long as that law has been drawn up, or has
developed, in a manner that suits the requirements of modern commerce. In the real world, some national systems of law
will be found to contain outdated laws and regulations that make them unsuitable for use in international contracts.
3. 130
Indeed, even well-developed and modern systems of law are not necessarily best suited to the needs of international
(as opposed to purely domestic) commerce. The law of a country reflects the social, economic, and (above all) political
environment of that particular country. If a country habitually controls the import and export trade (perhaps permitting such
activities only through state corporations), and prohibits the free flow of currency across the exchanges, these restrictions
will permeate the national law. This may or may not benefit the country concerned, but it is not an environment in which
international trade and commerce is likely to flourish. A national law that does not permit the free flow of goods and
services across national frontiers is probably not the most suitable law to govern international commercial contracts and
the disputes that may arise from them.
3. 131
Parties to an international commercial contract will need to bear these kinds of considerations in mind in choosing a given
system of law to govern their contractual relationships. Even in countries that favour international trade and development,
problems may arise, particularly where the contract is made with the state itself or with a state agency. The problem, shortly
stated, is that the state (as legislator) may change the law and so change the terms of the contract lawfully, but without
the agreement of the other party to the contract. The state may, for instance, impose labour or import restrictions, which
render performance of the contract more expensive. Unless the contract has been drafted with such possible contingencies

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
in mind—and such contingencies may be difficult to foresee—it is the private party who will suffer from this change in
the equilibrium of the contract.
3. 132
The problem of protecting a party from changes in the local law was considered in the Sapphire arbitration: 169
Under the present agreement, the foreign company was bringing financial and technical assistance to Iran,
which involved it in investments, responsibilities and considerable risks. It therefore seems normal that
they should be protected against any legislative changes which might alter the character of the contract and
that they should be assured of some legal security. This would not be guaranteed to them by the outright
application of Iranian law, which it is within the power of the Iranian State to change. 170
Precluding unfair treatment
3. 133
Various devices have been borrowed from private law contracts in an attempt to maintain the balance of the contract.
Historically, these have included revision clauses, hardship clauses, and force majeure clauses, all of which have played
a part in helping to maintain the balance of the contractual relationship. 171
Stabilisation clauses
3. 134
One method of maintaining the balance of a contract is by including a ‘stabilisation clause’, that is, a clause which stabilises
(or protects) the agreed terms from subsequent changes in the governing law. Such stability may be particularly important
in a long-term government contract governed by the law of the host state which the government may be in a position
unilaterally to change.
3. 135
The classic type of stability provision was the ‘freezing’ clause, by which the national law has been ‘frozen’ by means of
the parties agreeing that the law of the state party will be applied as it stood on a given date. Strictly speaking, the state
law does not then operate as the applicable law, but as an immutable code of law incorporated into the contract. It will not
change no matter what amendments are made to the state law itself.
3. 136
However, stabilisation clauses came under increasing scrutiny on the basis that private investors should not be in a position
to limit a host state’s ability to modernise its laws.
3. 137
More recently, stabilisation clauses can be divided into broadly two distinct groups—namely, freezing clauses and
economic equilibrium clauses, which are becoming more common. 172
3. 138
As their name implies, ‘economic equilibrium’, or ‘renegotiation’, clauses attempt to maintain the original economic
equilibrium of the parties at the time of contracting, where subsequent measures might otherwise alter the expected
economic benefits to which the parties have subscribed. 173  These clauses do not aim to freeze the law; thus newly enacted
laws will apply to the investment. However, they will provide the investor with a contractual entitlement to be compensated
for the cost of complying with new laws or, alternatively, may require the parties to negotiate in good faith to restore the
original economic equilibrium of the contract. Avoiding any purported restriction on the development of local law, such
clauses thereby steer clear of the principal ground of criticism of ‘freezing’ clauses. 174
3. 139

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
Both categories of stabilisation clause therefore present different ways of allocating ‘change of law’ risk between investors
and host states. Moreover, such clauses could support claims by investors pursuant to the ‘expropriation’, ‘fair and equitable
treatment’, or ‘umbrella’ provisions in investment treaties.
(ii) Mandatory law
3. 140
Although it is generally recognised that parties to an international commercial agreement are free to choose for themselves
the law (or legal rules) applicable to that agreement, there are limits to this freedom. Mandatory rules have been defined as
those that ‘cannot be derogated from by way of Contract’, 175  and may feature in the determination of a contractual dispute
in addition to the governing law selected by the parties.
3. 141
Thus, by way of example, Russian law may feature in the determination of corporate governance issues relating to a Russian
company even if the arbitration arises from a shareholders’ agreement governed by Swedish law. In the same way, again by
way of example, US-quoted companies cannot exclude the application of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 from
the operations simply by concluding an investment agreement in Kazakhstan that is subject to Kazakh law. Moreover, in yet
another example that the authors have seen in practice in an ICC case in Paris, the commercial export of defence technology
from the United States to the Gulf region will be subject to the US International Trade in Arms Regulations even if the supply
contract in question is governed by the law of the United Arab Emirates. However, perhaps the most frequently encountered
instance of the application of mandatory law is competition, or anti-trust, law, and the authors now proceed to use that as
an illustration.
3. 142
As already discussed in Chapter 2, 176  at one time it was widely considered that the private forum of arbitration was not
appropriate for the determination of claims under competition law. Landmark judgments such as that of the US Supreme
Court in Mitsubishi Motor Corporation v Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, 177  however, have long since confirmed the arbitrability
of competition law issues. A decision of the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) goes further, 178  and suggests that,
in Europe at least, arbitral tribunals may be duty-bound—or may at least have a discretion—to address issues of European
competition law ex officio even where they have not been raised by the parties themselves, because such issues constitute
a matter of public policy. 179
3. 143
Another example of the impact of mandatory law is a decision of the CJEU that has called into question the enforceability
of awards rendered by investment treaty tribunals where the law applicable to their dispute includes EU law. The case of
Slovak Republic v Achmea concerned a Dutch insurance company that had established a subsidiary in Slovakia that was
detrimentally affected by a change in the regulations concerning private health insurance in Slovakia. Achmea commenced
treaty arbitration under the Czechoslovakia–Netherlands BIT, which stated that the law applicable to the dispute would
include ‘the law in force of the Contracting Party concerned’ as well as ‘the provisions of [ …] other relevant Agreements
between the Contracting Parties’. 180
3. 144
Achmea prevailed in the arbitration, and Slovakia sought to annul the award at the seat of the arbitration, in Germany. Slovakia
submitted that the arbitration clause contained in the Czechoslovakia–Netherlands BIT was contrary to provisions of the
Treaty for the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), namely: (i) Article 344 TFEU, which prohibits EU Member
States from submitting a dispute concerning the interpretation or application of EU law to any method of settlement other
than those for which the EU Treaties provide (that is, excluding arbitration); and (ii) Article 267 TFEU, which provides for
a preliminary ruling mechanism that ensures that only the CJEU gives a final, legally binding interpretation of EU law (and
which an arbitral tribunal could not request).
3. 145

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
The German courts referred these questions to the CJEU for a preliminary ruling, and the CJEU ruled that the arbitration
clause in the Czechoslovakia–Netherlands BIT was contrary to Articles 267 and 344 TFEU. 181  Of primary concern to the
CJEU was the applicable law clause in the underlying BIT, which directed an arbitral tribunal to interpret and apply the law
of the BIT parties (which includes EU law), contrary to the terms of the TFEU. 182  Three years later, the CJEU made a similar
ruling in September 2021, in the case of Komstroy, ruling that intra-EU arbitrations under the Energy Charter Treaty (ECT)
are also incompatible with EU law. 183
3. 146
It is important to understand what is behind the rulings of the CJEU, which have understandably caused much disquiet in the
world of arbitration. The CJEU is concerned to be and to remain the ultimate authority on the law of the EU. To this end,
national courts within the EU can refer a matter of EU law to the CJEU for a preliminary ruling, as the German court did in
Achmea. This enables the CJEU to have the final word on issues of EU law. But there is no such mechanism of referral so far
as arbitral tribunals are concerned, and this has led the CJEU to question whether arbitral tribunals applying EU law threaten
the autonomy of the system of EU law, and the CJEU’s supervision of that autonomy.
(iii) Public international law, general principles of law, and public policy
3. 147
Public international law is concerned primarily with states, but not exclusively so. 184  As Dame Rosalyn Higgins, a former
president of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague, has contended, international law is a dynamic (not static)
decision-making process, in which there are a variety of participants:
Now, in this model, there are no ‘subjects’ and ‘objects’, but only participants. Individuals are participants,
along with states, international organizations (such as the United Nations, or the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) or the [International Labour Organization] ILO) [sic], multinational corporations, and indeed private
non-governmental groups. 185
3. 148
Amongst the ‘participants’ to whom President Higgins referred are those individuals and corporations who brought claims
before the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal and those ‘investors’ who seek to protect their investment through the
machinery of ICSID. 186  This has brought public international law into sharper focus as far as private individuals and
corporations—and their lawyers—are concerned. Increasingly, ‘international law’ may be specified as the substantive law of
a contract, particularly where that contract is with a state or state agency. The reference may be to ‘international law’ on its
own, or it may be used in conjunction with a national system of law. Commentators have argued that international arbitral
tribunals also have an inherent authority to apply general principles of law, and indeed that they routinely do apply non-state
law to resolve disputes between private parties, especially where the parties have no agreement on the lex contractus. 187
3. 149
Reference has already been made to the freedom that parties (generally) have in selecting the law or the legal rules applicable
to their contract. There is no reason, in principle, why they should not select public international law as the law that is to
govern their contractual relationship. 188  To quote President Higgins again:
The increasing importance of international arbitration is an area that we should perhaps be watching. It is now
commonplace for a foreign private corporation and a state who have entered into contractual relations to agree
to international arbitration in the event of a dispute. (And, in principle, the private party could be an individual,
though as such he will probably have less leverage than a foreign corporation and may well have to accept the
local legal system rather than reference to international arbitration.) The applicable law clause may designate a
national legal system, but more usually it will refer to ‘general principles of law’ or ‘the law of country X and
the relevant principles of general international law’, or some such similar formula. At one bound, therefore,
the private party has escaped the need to have his claim brought by his national government, and can invoke
international law. Thus, if State X and Mr Y have a contract, State X’s ability to vary the terms of that contract

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
will be interpreted by reference to the relevant principles of international law; and compensation due to Mr Y
will likewise be appraised by reference to international law [ … ] Arbitral clauses which refer to international
law as the applicable law effectively remove the alleged inability of individuals to be the bearer of rights under
international law. This is being done by mutual consent, of course—but the point is that there is no inherent
reason why the individual should not be able directly to invoke international law and to be the beneficiary of
international law. 189
3. 150
There are many sources of public international law, including international conventions and international custom, but probably
the most relevant, as far as non-state parties are concerned, are ‘the general principles of law recognised by civilised
nations’. 190  These have been defined as ‘the general principles of municipal jurisprudence, in particular of private law, in
so far as they are applicable to relations of States’. 191
3. 151
However, the problem of adopting public international law as the system of law that is to govern a commercial relationship is
not a problem of principle, but of practice. Public international law, being concerned primarily with the relationships between
states, is not particularly well equipped to deal with detailed contractual issues—such as mistake, misrepresentation, time
of performance, the effect of bankruptcy or liquidation, force majeure, or the measure of damages, and so forth. The same
criticism may be directed at the choice of ‘general principles of law’ as the governing law of a commercial contract. The
problem with the general principles is they are just that: they deal with such topics as the principle of good faith in treaty
relations, abuse of rights, and the concept of state and individual responsibility. They are excellent as generalisations (and, in
this sense, can, as one commentary puts it, ‘isolate the peculiarities of national law that may hinder the fair resolution of an
individual case’ 192 ), but may lack sufficient detail to address all the complexities of contractual relations. 193  That is why the
authors suggest that if they are to be used in a contract, they should be used as a concurrent law, rather than on their own. 194
3. 152
As another source of concurrently applicable law, some commentators view certain matters of international public policy
as applying to the interpretation or application of a contract. 195  International public policy considerations may apply, for
example, where a tribunal is faced with concerns about a contract being a product of corruption, or where the performance of
a contract may comprise part of a corrupt scheme. An illustrative example is the conclusion of the arbitral tribunal in World
Duty Free Company Limited v The Republic of Kenya, which addressed the argument made by the government of Kenya
that a contract with the claimant was tainted with illegality and thus unenforceable, because it was procured by the payment
of a bribe from the claimant to the then President of Kenya. The tribunal, having surveyed the near universal condemnation
of corruption, concluded that:
In light of domestic laws and international conventions relating to corruption, and in light of the decisions
taken in this matter by courts and arbitral tribunals, this Tribunal is convinced that bribery is contrary to the
international public policy of most, if not all, States or, to use another formula, to transnational public policy.
Thus, claims based on contracts of corruption or on contracts obtained by corruption cannot be upheld by the
Arbitral Tribunal. 196
3. 153
The tribunal reached this conclusion, notwithstanding the submission of the claimant that ‘it was routine practice to make
such donations in advance of doing business in Kenya’, and that the payments were ‘regarded as a matter of protocol’ such
that ‘domestic public policy’ supported upholding the contract notwithstanding the bribe. 197
3. 154
If an award does not adequately address indications of corruption, there is a risk that it may be challenged. 198  This, in turn,
suggests that an arbitrator’s duty to render an enforceable award may be tied to that arbitrator’s consideration, where relevant,
of issues of international public policy, regardless (or indeed in furtherance) of a choice of law agreement.

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
(iv) Multiple applicable laws
Dépeçage
3. 155
A single contract may be governed by multiple laws, depending on the parties’ choice of law and the context of their
agreement. One example is where the parties agree that specific clauses or substantive issues are governed by distinct
regimes, known as dépeçage. 199  An example commonly referred to is the ‘Bermuda Form’ insurance policy, which applies
New York law other than where specific issues are governed by English law. The 2019 Guide on the Law Applicable to
International Commercial Contracts in the Americas, issued by the Inter-American Judicial Committee of the Organisation
of American States (OAS), contains specific provisions on this matter and encourages adjudicators to permit dépeçage
when granted discretion to do so. 200
Concurrent laws, combined laws, and the tronc commun doctrine
3. 156
In deciding on the ‘law’ applicable to their agreement, parties may expressly or tacitly adopt multiple laws or rules of law
and apply them concurrently to their contractual relationship. As Paulsson and Petrochilos note, the parties’ designation of
an applicable law may not, on its true construction, cover all of the legal issues that pertain to the substance of a dispute;
rather, ‘a host of other rules/laws may need to be applied to resolve the substantive dispute’. 201
3. 157
Modern procedural rules provide for this possibility. For example, while the UNCITRAL Rules 1976 provided that
a tribunal ‘shall apply the law designated by the parties’ to their contractual relationship, the subsequently revised
UNCITRAL Rules 2010 in Article 35.1 state that the tribunal ‘shall apply the rules of law designated by the parties’. The
reference to the plural ‘enables the parties to designate as applicable to their case rules of more than one legal system,
including rules of law which have been elaborated on the international level’. 202  Similarly, and as discussed in further
detail below, 203  the Model Law provides that a ‘law or legal system’ may be designated as the law applicable to the
substance of a dispute, while concurrently and ‘[i]n all cases’, a tribunal ‘shall take into account the usages of the trade
applicable to the transaction’ as well as principles of equity where the parties have provided authorisation to do so. 204
3. 158
The concurrent application of laws to a commercial dispute involving a state or state party is illustrated by the role of
international law. As already indicated in the discussion of contracts to which a state or state entity is a party, 205  one of
the main anxieties among commercial organisations engaged in trading or other business relationships with a sovereign
state is that, after the bargain has been struck and the contract has been signed, the state may change its own law to the
disadvantage of the private party.
3. 159
One established safeguard against unfair or arbitrary action by the state party to the contract is to stipulate that the state’s
own law will apply only insofar as it accords with either public international law, the general principles of law, or some
other system with accepted minimum standards.
3. 160
The ICSID Convention, which established ICSID, 206  makes use of this system of concurrent laws. The Convention
provides for the resolution of disputes between a state (or a state entity) and a private party; 207  it stipulates that if a dispute
arises and there has been no express choice of law by the parties, the arbitral tribunal will apply the law of the contracting
state party to the arbitration and ‘such rules of international law as may be applicable’. 208  Thus honour is satisfied: the

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
state’s own law is given proper recognition. Yet some fetter is imposed upon possibly unfair or arbitrary action by means
of the reference to public international law. 209
3. 161
This is a system of concurrent laws. For example, if a state were to terminate a long-term investment contract by an act
of nationalisation, it would presumably do so in a way that would be valid under its own law. However, such an act of
nationalisation would not be valid under international law unless it were shown to be non-discriminatory and to serve a
public purpose, with proper compensation being offered. In this way, international law would be brought into play to set
a minimum standard, which the arbitral tribunal would be empowered to uphold in its award. 210
3. 162
Concurrent laws may also apply in circumstances of multiple applicable mandatory laws. This could occur where, for
example, economic sanctions are part of mandatory public international law, such as those set by the Security Council of
the United Nations, or where an arbitral tribunal applies the mandatory law of a third state. The latter is provided for in
the Rome Convention, which provides:
When applying under this Convention the law of a country, effect may be given to the mandatory rules of
the law of another country with which the situation has a close connection, if and in so far as, under the law
of the latter country, those rules must be applied whatever the law applicable to the contract. In considering
whether to give effect to these mandatory rules, regard shall be had to their nature and purpose and to the
consequences of their application or non-application. 211
Libyan oil nationalisation arbitrations
3. 163
The coupling of national law with international law is seen in the three arbitrations that arose out of the Libyan oil
nationalisations, the Texaco, BP, and Liamco arbitrations, although it worked effectively in only one of them. 212
3. 164
The choice-of-law clause was identical in the different concession agreements that came before three different arbitrators.
It read as follows:
This concession shall be governed by and interpreted in accordance with the principles of law of Libya
common to the principles of international law and, in the absence of such common principles, then by and in
accordance with the general principles of law, including such of those principles as may have been applied
by international tribunals. 213
3. 165
In the event, this clause was interpreted in three different ways by the three different arbitrators:
 
i.in the Texaco arbitration, the sole arbitrator held that the clause was primarily a choice of public international law;
 
ii.in the BP arbitration, the sole arbitrator appears to have regarded it as a choice of the general principles of law; 214
and
 
iii.in the Liamco arbitration, the sole arbitrator held that the governing law of the contract was the law of Libya, but
that the clause excluded any part of that law that was in conflict with the principles of international law. 215
3. 166
The arbitral tribunal in the Aminoil arbitration arrived at a similar conclusion in respect of a concession agreement that
had been brought to an end by an act of nationalisation, coupled with an offer of ‘fair compensation’. 216  Aminoil and
the government of Kuwait agreed in the submission agreement that their dispute should be settled by arbitration ‘on the

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
basis of law’, but left the choice of law to the tribunal, with the stipulation that the tribunal should have regard to ‘the
quality of the parties, the transnational character of their relations and the principles of law and practice prevailing in the
modern world’. 217  On this basis, Aminoil argued that the concession agreement was governed by transnational law, which
it equated with the general principles of law, including the principles of pacta sunt servanda, reparation for injury, respect
for acquired rights, the prohibition of unjust enrichment, and the requirement of good faith (including the prohibition
against abuse of rights and estoppel or preclusion). The government, for its part, argued for the application of the law of
Kuwait, of which public international law formed part.
3. 167
It is useful to look at the tribunal’s decision on the applicable law for two reasons. First, the state of Kuwait actually
took part in the Aminoil arbitration, unlike Libya which effectively boycotted the Libyan arbitrations; secondly, and more
relevantly for current practice, the dramatic increase in the number and importance of ICSID arbitrations has focused
attention both on the involvement of national states in international arbitrations and on concurrent law clauses.
3. 168
The tribunal in Aminoil stated that the question of the law applicable to the substantive issues in dispute before it was a
simple one. The law of Kuwait applied to many matters with which it was directly concerned, but, as the government had
argued, established public international law was part of the law of Kuwait and the general principles of law were part of
public international law. 218  The tribunal concluded:
The different sources of the law thus to be applied are not—at least in the present case—in contradiction with
one another. Indeed, if, as recalled above, international law constitutes an integral part of the law of Kuwait,
the general principles of law correspondingly recognize the rights of the State in its capacity of supreme
protector of the general interest. If the different legal elements involved do not always and everywhere
blend as successfully as in the present case, it is nevertheless on taking advantage of their resources, and
encouraging their trend towards unification, that the future of a truly international economic order in the
investment field will depend. 219
3. 169
The use of a system of concurrent laws, such as that envisaged by the ICSID Convention in the absence of an express
choice of law by the parties to the dispute, seems to be the way forward for international contracts to which a state or
state entity is a party. The reference to the law of the state concerned gives proper importance to the sovereign position
of the state party, yet the reference to international law, or possibly to the general principles of law, provides a measure of
protection to the private party to the contract. There is a balance to be struck between state law and international law. It is
important that arbitral tribunals should be prepared to give due weight to both.
3. 170
While this discussion has shown where the search for a ‘neutral’ law may lead, particularly in relation to state contracts, the
search for such a law is not confined to state contracts. One solution, which has been canvassed in theory and occasionally
adopted in practice, is to choose the national laws of both parties and so obtain the best (or possibly the worst) of both
worlds. This tronc commun doctrine is based on the proposition that, if free to do so, each party to an international
commercial transaction would choose its own national law to govern that transaction. If this proves unacceptable, why not
go some way towards achieving this objective by identifying the common core of the two different systems of law and
applying this to the matters in dispute? 220
3. 171
The Sapphire arbitration has already been mentioned as an illustration of the problem of affording protection to the private
party to a state contract against changes in the national law enacted by the state party. 221  There was no express choice of
law in the contract. There were, however, choice-of-law clauses in similar concession agreements previously made by the
respondent, the National Iranian Oil Company, which were in the following terms:
In view of the diverse nationalities of the parties to this Agreement, it shall be governed by and interpreted
and applied in accordance with the principles of law common to Iran and the several nations in which the

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
other parties to this Agreement are incorporated, and in the absence of such common principles then by
and in accordance with principles of law recognised by civilised nations in general, including such of those
principles as may have been applied by international tribunals. 222
3. 172
This choice-of-law clause appears to be an adoption of the tronc commun solution to the choice-of-law problem. It would
require the arbitrator to find out what principles existed in the law of Iran, which were also to be found in the national
laws of the other parties to the agreement, and to apply those common principles to the matters in dispute before him or
her. However, the arbitrator in the case adopted a different approach: he read the clause as entitling him to disregard the
law of Iran (although this was specifically mentioned in the choice-of-law clause) and to apply the general principles of
law. The arbitrator asserted:
It is quite clear from the above that the parties intended to exclude the application of Iranian law. But they
have not chosen another positive legal system and this omission is on all the evidence deliberate. All the
connecting factors cited above point to the fact that the parties therefore intended to submit the interpretation
and performance of their contract to principles of law generally recognised by civilised nations, to which
article 37 of the agreement refers, being the only clause which contains an express reference to an applicable
law. 223
3. 173
Many years after the Sapphire arbitration, another important example of combined laws (or again, more correctly, of
combined legal principles) came to be generally reported (and sometimes misreported). In the Channel Tunnel project,
the concessionnaire Eurotunnel entered into a construction contract with a group of Anglo–French companies, known as
Trans-Manche Link. Surprisingly, this agreement between two private entities referred not to the national law of either
party, nor indeed to any national system of law, but instead to the common principles of both systems of law. 224  The
relevant clause provided that the contract would:
in all respects be governed by and interpreted in accordance with the principles common to both English law
and French law, and in the absence of such common principles by such general principles of international
trade law as have been applied by national and international tribunals. 225
3. 174
A dispute under the construction contract went to the English High Court, and this choice-of-law clause was considered
both by the Court of Appeal and by the highest court in England, the House of Lords (now the UK Supreme Court). 226
In the Court of Appeal, one of the judges said:
Since both Eurotunnel and the contractors were partly French and partly English, I wonder why they did not
choose either English law or French law exclusively—and for that matter why they chose Brussels as the
seat of any arbitration. The hybrid system of law which they did choose has a superficial attraction, but I
suspect that it will lead to lengthy and expensive dispute. 227
3. 175
This comment proved prescient. 228  The search for common principles of English and French law meant that, for each
dispute that arose under the construction contract—and there were many—teams of French and English lawyers on each
side had to determine what the answer was likely to be under the applicable principles of their own law and then work
out to what extent, if at all, these principles were common to both systems of law. As one of the construction group’s
external counsel has commented:
The main reason for the difficulty in applying a clause providing for the application of common principles
between English and French law is that although both systems tend to produce the same or very similar

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
results, they fall short of providing the set of common principles which is necessary to cover all contractual
disputes. 229
3. 176
Although the Court of Appeal was, in passing, critical of this choice-of-law clause—as a hybrid system of law—it did
not suggest that it was anything other than a binding and enforceable agreement. This emerges even more strongly in the
decision of the House of Lords:
The parties chose an indeterminate ‘law’ to govern their substantive rights; an elaborate process for
ascertaining those rights; and a location for that purpose outside the territories of the participants. This
conspicuously neutral, ‘a-national’ and extra-judicial structure may well have been the first choice for the
special needs of the Channel Tunnel venture. But whether it was right or wrong, it is the choice which the
parties have made. 230
3. 177
The Channel Tunnel project was one of the major international construction contracts of the twentieth century. 231  Of
course, even if only one system of law had been chosen as the applicable law, both French and English lawyers would
have been needed to deal with the financing of the project, as well as ‘domestic’ issues such as staff accommodation on
either side of the Channel, labour relations, and so on—but the dispute resolution process itself would have been simpler,
less expensive, and, it is suggested, more predictable.
3. 178
There are many large international projects in which lawyers from different countries are likely to be needed. In such major
projects, the expense involved in searching for the common principles of two national systems of law, or for ‘the common
core’ of these two national laws, may perhaps be justified (particularly if the two systems are known to have much in
common). 232  However, in ordinary trading contracts of the kind that constitute the day-to-day substance of international
commerce, it must be doubtful whether the additional trouble and expense can be justified.
3. 179
In summary, it is suggested that, in ordinary international commercial contracts, including construction contracts, the parties
would do well to try to agree upon a given national law as the law of the contract. It may take time to reach agreement,
but it will be time well spent. Where one of the parties to the contract is a state or a state agency, it may be necessary to
adopt a system of concurrent laws (which may not be easy to operate, but which will probably be better than a system
of combined laws).
(v) Transnational law (including lex mercatoria, the UNIDROIT Principles, trade usages,
and Shari’ah)
Introduction
3. 180
The reference to ‘such rules of international law as may be agreed by the parties’ (as in Article 42 of the ICSID Convention),
or to ‘the relevant principles of international law’ (as in the Channel Tunnel Treaty) serve to remind us that it is not the
whole corpus of law, but only certain specific rules of law that are likely to be relevant in any given dispute. For example,
an international contract for the sale of goods governed by the law of Austria will usually bring into consideration only
those provisions of Austrian law that deal with the sale of goods. An international construction project that is governed
by the law of England will principally involve consideration of those particular areas of law that are concerned with
construction contracts. This breaking down of the whole body of the law into specific, discrete sections is reflected by
increased specialisation within the legal profession itself. Thus, for example, within an association of lawyers such as the

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
IBA, there are specialist groups whose primary expertise is in energy law, or intellectual property, or construction law—
and so forth. 233
3. 181
In these circumstances, it seems appropriate to ask whether or not a particular group of bankers, or merchants, or traders may
develop their own special rules of conduct that gradually acquire the force of law, either by themselves or by incorporation
into national law or international treaty. Experience suggests that the answer to this question is a cautious ‘yes’. 234  Indeed,
in the past, this is how much of our law developed. Colombos, for example, tells of the early maritime codes such as the
Rhodian Sea Law, which dated from the second or third century BC and which was ‘of great authority in the Mediterranean,
for its principles were accepted by both Greeks and Romans and its memory lasted for a thousand years’. 235  This was an
early form of transnational law, as indeed was the celebrated Consolato des Mare which, again according to Colombos,
‘throughout the Middle Ages, reigned supreme in the Mediterranean until the advent of sovereign states, national legislation
superseding the customary laws of the sea, so often incorporating many of its rules’. 236
3. 182
It is significant that, within time, the ‘customary laws of the sea’ were superseded by legislation. As states evolve, this
is almost inevitable. In the present-day world of sovereign states and complex legislation, it may be questioned whether
there is still room for the crystallisation of customary practices into rules of law. Even if there is, it is likely to be confined
to particular usages and to particular trades—and to grow, so to speak, in the interstices of existing laws, rather than to
form one vast corpus of law.
3. 183
There are many different communities carrying on activities that may be as diverse (and have as little in common) as the
transport of goods or the establishment of an international telecommunications network. The rules of law that are relevant
to these different commercial activities are in themselves likely to be very different. They may share certain basic legal
concepts—such as the sanctity of contracts (pacta sunt servanda)—but even here different considerations are likely to
apply. For example, an international contract for the sale of goods will be performed within a comparatively short timescale
—but compare this to a major infrastructure project that will take many years to perform and during the course of which
the basis upon which the original bargain was struck may change dramatically.
3. 184
Given these words of caution, the approach adopted in this book is pragmatic, rather than theoretical. This is probably the
most useful approach, since in practice lawyers and arbitrators are concerned with a particular dispute or series of disputes
rather than with some ‘general theory’ of law. In a report on transnational rules, the author referred to the approach adopted
by the International Law Association (ILA) formulated as follows:
The Committee’s approach in its continuing study of transnational law has been to step back from the highly
contentious issues that arise from any theoretical consideration of transnational law, or lex mercatoria, as
a discrete body of principles and to examine, in a pragmatic way, the application of individual identifiable
principles at least as a phenomenon of international commercial arbitration, which it undoubtedly is. 237
Lex mercatoria
3. 185
One of the more important developments in the field of transnational law has been that of the lex mercatoria.
3. 186
This modern version of a ‘law merchant’ is taken to consist of rules and practices that have evolved within the
international business communities. Professor Goldman, who named this new ‘law’ and who contributed greatly to its
development, 238  referred to it as having had ‘an illustrious precursor in the Roman jus gentium’, 239  which he described
as ‘an autonomous source of law proper to the economic relations (commercium) between citizens and foreigners
(peregrine)’. 240

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
3. 187
The advantage of such a code of law is obvious: it would be adapted to the needs of modern international commerce and
it would be of uniform application. The problem is whether such a system of law, which might have existed in Roman
times or in the Middle Ages, can today arise spontaneously (as it were)—amongst states that already possess in full
measure their own laws, orders, and regulations. Some commentators greeted the new lex mercatoria with approval. 241
Others were politely sceptical, 242  or (in the context of state contracts) dismissed it as an idea whose time has passed,
since more sophisticated laws and rules now exist. 243  Others still were openly hostile. 244  What, then, is this new ‘law’
that has aroused so much controversy, and which, from time to time, has made its appearance in arbitral awards and
in court proceedings?
3. 188
For Professor Goldman, the distinguishing features of the lex mercatoria were its ‘customary’ and ‘spontaneous’
nature. 245  It was his view that international commercial relationships:
may perfectly well be governed by a body of specific rules, including transnational custom, general
principles of law and arbitral case law. It makes no difference if this body of rules is not part of a
legal order 246  comporting its own legislative and judicial organs. Within this body of rules, the general
principles of law are not only those referred to in Article 38(a) of the Statute of the International Court
of Justice; there may be added to it principles progressively established by the general and constant usage
of international trade. 247
3. 189
It is not difficult to envisage rules developing in a particular area of international trade (such as documentary credits) and
eventually being codified, either in national legislation or by international treaty, so as to attain the force of law. 248  But
the custom in question is usually that of a particular trade or industry. The point has already been made that international
traders do not constitute a homogeneous community. Instead they constitute myriad communities, each with their own
different customary rules. How are these very different and specific rules to evolve into universal rules of international
trade law?
3. 190
Rather than pose these theoretical questions, it is perhaps more useful to ask: what is this new law? What principles does
it embody? What specific rules does it lay down? In short, what is its content?
3. 191
There appear to be two alternative approaches towards assessing the content of the new lex mercatoria: the ‘list’ method
and the ‘functional’ approach.
LIST METHOD
3. 192
As far as the ‘list’ method is concerned, various lists of rules or principles have been prepared over the past decade, 249
drawing, amongst other things, upon the UNIDROIT Principles and the Principles of European Contract Law 1998,
as updated in 2002 (the Lando Principles). The list process has been criticised as lacking flexibility. To counter this
criticism, Professor Berger has proposed ‘creeping codification’:
Creeping codification is to be distinguished from more formalized techniques for defining the lex
mercatoria (UNIDROIT and Lando Principles): it is intended to avoid the ‘static element’ characteristic
of other approaches and to provide the openness and flexibility required in order to take account of the
rapid development of international trade and commerce. 250

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
Creeping codification is intended to ensure that a list of transnational commercial principles is capable of being
rapidly, and continually, revised and updated. Professor Berger established a database known as Translex, 251  as the
institutional framework within which to develop and update the list on an ongoing basis. 252
FUNCTIONAL APPROACH
3. 193
The alternative approach involves identifying particular rules of the lex mercatoria as and when specific questions
arise. This ‘functional’ approach regards the lex mercatoria as a method for determining the appropriate rule or
principle. Professor Gaillard was a leading exponent of this approach, 253  who emphasised that the controversy, which
initially focused on the existence of transnational rules, has shifted. He said that it now focused:
on the establishment in further detail of the content of those rules or the more systematic assessment
of the means to do so. As a result, very significant differences of opinion on how such goals may be
achieved have emerged. 254
3. 194
According to Professor Gaillard, the functional approach presents the advantage that any claim made by a party in a
given case would necessarily find an answer, which may not be the position under the list method. 255
3. 195
As a practical matter, when arbitrators seek to identify the content of the lex mercatoria, they draw increasingly on
the UNIDROIT Principles:
If the Unidroit Principles embody concepts already in the lex mercatoria, [ …] these Principles would
seem to provide a point of explicit reference for arbitral tribunals. And this is exactly what appears to be
happening: the Unidroit Principles have already been referred to in about thirty ICC cases, it is recently
reported, in order to identify general legal principles. 256
3. 196
The usefulness of the UNIDROIT Principles and of the Lando Principles (which set out rules common to the main
legal systems surveyed) has been recognised by other leading commentators, noting that ‘[t]he result—a concrete,
usable list of principles and rules—addresses head-on the traditional concern of practitioners that the lex is too abstract
and impractical to be of any use in the real world.’ 257
3. 197
That the UNIDROIT Principles embody concepts within the lex mercatoria, but are not a source of it, has similarly
been stressed by Professor Mayer in a useful survey of ICC awards on the issue:
Each arbitral award stands on its own. There is no doctrine of precedence or of stare decisis as between
different awards; and in general there is no appellate court to sort the wheat from the chaff. There
is, in this sense, no formal control of the arbitral process. 258  Arbitrators are free to decide as they
choose. Conscientious arbitrators will obviously do their utmost to ensure that their decision is made
in accordance with the law governing the contract. Their professional conscience will demand no less;
and they will not decide ex aequo et bono without the express authorisation of the parties. But if the
law governing the contract consists of those rules or principles which the arbitrators consider most
appropriate, and which may conveniently be labelled as part of the lex mercatoria, those arbitrators are
in effect free to decide in accordance with what they consider to be just and equitable, whilst purporting
to decide in accordance with legal rules. 259

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
18
This is a pertinent observation. Under the guise of applying the lex mercatoria, an arbitral tribunal may in effect pick
such rules as seem to the tribunal to be just and reasonable—which may or may not be what the parties intended
when they made their contract.
3. 198
The lex mercatoria has had some impact upon the law of international arbitration, 260  and has been described by a
leading authority as a body of ‘substantive and procedural practices which parties and tribunals expect to apply and
are applied in international arbitration’. 261  It has also served to remind both the parties to international arbitration
and the arbitral tribunals called upon to resolve their disputes that they are operating at an international level, and that
different considerations may come into play from those to be found in purely national, or domestic, arbitrations.
3. 199
Where the lex mercatoria is said to govern the parties’ contract, either by agreement of the parties themselves or by a
decision of the tribunal, will a court enforce that choice of law, if called upon to do so? And will such a court enforce
an award made in conformity with the lex mercatoria, if called upon to do so?
3. 200
In principle, the answer to both questions appears to be ‘yes’. If the parties have agreed upon a particular method of
dispute resolution, the court should be prepared to enforce that agreement following normal contractual principles. 262
Again, if the arbitral tribunal has carried out the mission entrusted to it and has decided the case in accordance with
the rules of law chosen by the parties, there would seem to be no reason why a court should refuse to enforce the
award. The tribunal has simply done what the parties empowered it to do. As regards enforcement of the award, the
ILA expressed the position that should sensibly be taken: 263
The fact that an international arbitrator has based an award on transnational rules (general principles of
law, principles common to several jurisdictions, international law, usages of trade, etc) rather than on
the law of a particular State should not itself affect the validity or enforceability of the award: (i) where
the parties have agreed that the arbitrator may apply transnational rules; or (ii) where the parties have
remained silent concerning the applicable law. 264
This position has been adopted by various national courts, including the French Court of Cassation, the Austrian
Supreme Court, and the English Court of Appeal. 265
UNIDROIT Principles
3. 201
The influence of codified terms and practices in the concept and development of a new lex mercatoria has already been
noted. For example, the ICC’s Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits, formulated almost a century ago
in 1933, 266  have helped significantly in the move towards a single, uniform international standard for the interpretation of
documentary credits—those valuable pieces of paper upon which much of international trade depends. Similarly, the ICC’s
International Rules for the Interpretation of Trade Terms (known as ‘Incoterms’) are intended to give a consistent, uniform
meaning to terms that are in frequent use in international trade—so that expressions such as ‘exw’ (meaning ‘ex works’),
‘cif’ (meaning cost, insurance, and freight), and ‘fob’ (meaning ‘free on board’) should mean the same to businessmen
and traders in São Paulo as they do to those based in Paris or New York. 267
3. 202
Reference has already been made to the UNIDROIT Principles, 268  which are, in nature, a restatement of the general
principles of contract law. The principles are comprehensive, 269  covering not only the interpretation and performance of
contractual obligations, but also the conduct of negotiations leading to the formation of a contract. They were developed
to include new rules relating to failed contracts, illegality, and conditions, as well as the plurality of obligors and obligees.

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
19
The emphasis is on good faith and fair dealing. 270  The aim is to establish a neutral set of rules for use throughout the
world without any particular bias to one system of law over another. As one experienced commentator has said: ‘They
were not drafted in the interest of a specific party or lobbying group. They will strike a fair balance between the rights
and obligations of all parties to the contract.’ 271
3. 203
The UNIDROIT Principles ‘represent a system of rules of contract law’. 272  They apply only when the parties choose
to apply them to their contract, or have agreed that their contract will be governed by ‘general principles of law’, the
lex mercatoria, or the like. 273  However, in practice, arbitral tribunals may themselves decide to refer to the UNIDROIT
Principles as an aid to the interpretation of contract terms and conditions—or even as a standard to be observed, for example
in the negotiation of a contract. 274
3. 204
In a Swedish arbitration in which a governing law had not been specifically designated in the parties’ contract, the European
claimant argued in favour of Swedish law, basing itself on the choice of Sweden as the place of arbitration. The Chinese
party argued in favour of Chinese law because China had the closest connection with the contract. The tribunal relied on
Article 24.1 of the Rules of the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (SCC Rules), 275  which
permitted it to apply ‘the law or rules of law which the tribunal considers to be most appropriate’. Having decided that
no common intention as to a particular national system of law could be found, the tribunal decided to adopt the only
codification of trade law that had the status of an internationally accepted code, namely:
the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts [ … ] The Tribunal determines that the
rules contained therein shall be the first source employed in reaching a decision on the issues in dispute in
the present arbitration. 276
3. 205
An example of how the UNIDROIT Principles are intended to work is its treatment of clauses limiting liability. In many
forms of contract, the party that bears the major responsibility for performance will seek either to limit its liability or even
to exclude liability altogether. A clause in a construction contract, for example, may state that the contractor has no liability
for loss of profit arising out of any breach of the contract, whether caused by negligence or any other breach of duty. The
question then arises as to the scope of this clause and, in particular, whether, in specific circumstances, it may be set aside
altogether. 277  In relation to such a claim, the UNIDROIT Principles state:
A clause which limits or excludes one party’s liability for non-performance or which permits one party to
render performance substantially different from what the other party reasonably expected may not be invoked
if it would be grossly unfair to do so, having regard to the purpose of the contract. 278
The effect of such a clause, in a dispute to which the UNIDROIT Principles are applicable, is to permit an arbitral tribunal to
disregard the exemption clause in appropriate circumstances. In each case, it will be for the tribunal to decide what was the
purpose of the contract and whether, in all of the circumstances, it would be ‘grossly unfair’ to apply the exemption clause.
Trade usages
3. 206
As already mentioned, institutional rules (such as those of the ICC) and international arbitration rules (such as those of
UNCITRAL) require an arbitral tribunal to take account of relevant trade usage. 279  A similar requirement is to be found
in the Model Law 280  and in some national legislation, such as the Netherlands Arbitration Act. 281
3. 207

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
20
The relevant trade usages will have to be established by evidence in any given case (unless the arbitrators are familiar
with them and make this clear to the parties). However, as previously mentioned, 282  organisations such as the ICC have
been prominent in attempting to establish a commonly understood meaning for expressions that are in frequent use in
international trade contracts and have developed Incoterms, in which the precise meaning and effect of such terms as ‘exw’,
‘cif’, and ‘fob’ are explained. It is obviously important that such terms should have the same meaning worldwide. To this
end, the precise extent of these rights and obligations is spelt out in the Incoterms.
3. 208
Standard form contracts are commonplace in many fields, including the shipping trade, the commodity markets, and the
oil and gas industry. The step from the establishment of international terms and conditions to the establishment of uniform
rules for the interpretation of these terms and conditions is a small, but important, one. Such uniform rules may apply only
within the ambit of a national system of law. But if the same rules are uniformly applied by different national courts, or
by arbitral tribunals, the basis is laid for the establishment of a customary law, which will have been created by merchants
and traders themselves (rather than by lawyers) and which may achieve international recognition.
Shari’ah law
3. 209
Modern codes of law in Islamic countries take account of Shari’ah, often as a principal source of law. 283  Shari’ah
itself contains general principles that are basic to any civilised system of law, such as good faith in the performance
of obligations and the observance of due process in the settlement of disputes. 284  Although there are differences from
country to country (partly as a result of the different schools of Islamic law and partly because some states are more
open to Western influences than others), Islamic law, traditions, and language give these states a common heritage and,
to some extent, a common approach to arbitration. 285
3. 210
In a case that came before the English High Court, a financial transaction had been structured in a manner (an ‘Estisna
form’) that ensured that the transaction conformed with orthodox Islamic banking practice. 286  There was provision
for any disputes to be settled by arbitration in London under the ICC Rules and there was a choice-of-law clause that
provided for any dispute to be ‘governed by the Law of England except to the extent it may conflict with Islamic Shari’ah,
which shall prevail’. A dispute arose and the ICC appointed as sole arbitrator Mr Samir Saleh, an experienced lawyer and
expert on Shari’ah law. The losing party challenged the arbitrator’s award, but the English court rejected this challenge,
holding that the award was a clear and full evaluation of the issues, and had all the appearances of being right. 287
3. 211
According to Professor Fadlallah, however, ‘the landscape was clouded’ 288  by three well-known awards, which, in
his view, are not confined to history 289  and continue to have ‘harmful effects’ on the development of Euro–Arab
arbitration. 290  In Sheikh Abu Dhabi v Petroleum Development Ltd, 291  Ruler of Qatar v International Marine Oil Co.
Ltd, 292  and Aramco v Government of Saudi Arabia, 293  the tribunals refused to apply Shari’ah on the ground that
it did not contain a ‘body of legal principles applicable to the construction of modern commercial instruments’. 294
Ironically, according to Professor Fadlallah, the outcome in each case would have been the same even if Shari’ah had
been applied. 295
Authority to apply non-national law
3. 212
The authority of an arbitral tribunal to apply a non-national system of law (such as the general principles of law, or the lex
mercatoria) will depend upon (a) the agreement of the parties, and (b) the provisions of the applicable law.
3. 213

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
21
The ICSID Convention, for example, is clear on this point. Article 42 states: ‘The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in
accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties.’ 296  The reference to ‘rules of law’, rather than to ‘law’
or ‘a system of law’, is a coded reference to the applicability of appropriate legal rules even though these may fall short
of being an established and autonomous system of law.
3. 214
Within different states, different positions are adopted. France and Switzerland, for example, allow arbitrators to decide
according to rules of law. 297  By contrast, the Model Law, whilst leaving it to the parties to make an express choice of such
‘rules of law’ as they wish, requires an arbitral tribunal, if the choice is left to the tribunal, to apply ‘the law determined
by the conflict of laws rules which it considers applicable’. 298  English law follows this approach: the arbitral tribunal has
to decide the dispute (a) in accordance with the law chosen by the parties, or (b) if the parties agree, in accordance with
‘such other considerations as are agreed by them or determined by the tribunal’; if there is no choice or agreement by the
parties, the tribunal must apply ‘the law’ determined by the appropriate conflict rules. 299  English courts have considered
the meaning of ‘such other considerations’ under section 46(1)(b) of the English Arbitration Act in the following cases:
 
i.in Musawi v R E International (UK) Ltd and ors, 300  the court held that section 46(1)(b) of the English Arbitration Act
entitled the parties to the arbitration to require the ayatollah arbitrator to apply Shari’ah law as the applicable law; and
 
ii.in Halpern v Halpern, 301  which concerned the application of Jewish law, the Court of Appeal ruled that if the seat
of arbitration were England, then section 46(1)(b) of the English Arbitration Act would permit the tribunal to apply
the parties’ choice of some form of rules or non-national law to govern the merits of their dispute. 302
Nevertheless, the meaning of ‘such other considerations’ is not yet entirely settled and it is difficult to transpose
interpretations from other jurisdictions in which similar concepts may have different meanings. In Switzerland, for instance,
ex aequo et bono is understood to mean the application of principles other than legal rules, while the concept of amiable
compositeur requires the application of legal rules, but allows arbitrators to moderate the effect of such rules. In France,
meanwhile, the two concepts are given a similar meaning.
3. 215
The ICC Rules, on the other hand, clearly go further than the Model Law (and the English Arbitration Act). They not only
allow the parties to choose the application of ‘rules of law’ to govern the dispute, but also allow the arbitral tribunal, in
the absence of an agreement by the parties, to apply ‘the rules of law which it determines to be appropriate’. 303  Thus,
by confirming their ability to choose rules of law other than those of a single state, the rules confer greater flexibility on
both the arbitrators and the parties. 304
(vi) Equity and good conscience
3. 216
Arbitrators may, from time to time, be required to settle a dispute by determining it on the basis of what is ‘fair and reasonable’,
rather than on the basis of law. Such power is conferred upon them by so-called equity clauses, which state, for example, that
the arbitrators shall ‘decide according to an equitable rather than a strictly legal interpretation’, or, more simply, that they
shall decide as amiables compositeurs. 305
3. 217
This power to decide ‘in equity’, as it is sometimes expressed, is open to several different interpretations. It may mean, for
instance, that the arbitral tribunal:
 
i.should apply relevant rules of law to the dispute, but may ignore any rules that are purely formalistic (for example a
requirement that the contract should have been made in some particular form); or
 
ii.should apply relevant rules of law to the dispute, but may ignore any rules that appear to operate harshly or unfairly
in the particular case before it; or

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
22
 
iii.should decide according to general principles of law; or
 
iv.may ignore completely any rules of law and decide the case on its merits, as these strike the arbitral tribunal.
3. 218
Commentators generally reject this fourth alternative. To the extent that they do agree, commentators seem to suggest that
even an arbitral tribunal that decides ‘in equity’ must act in accordance with some generally accepted legal principles as well
as any mandatory law applicable to the arbitration. For example, the Model Law requires that, even when authorised to act
as amiable compositeur, a tribunal must still ‘take into account the rules of the trade applicable to the transaction’. 306  It is
also doubtful that a tribunal acting as an amiable compositeur can disregard any or all of the express terms of the parties’
agreement. 307  Certain procedural rules, for example, may require a tribunal to ‘take into account the relevant provisions of
the contract, if any’, 308  and it seems difficult to conceive of many scenarios in which the draftsmen of a contract intended
for an arbitrator to disregard those terms in the event of a dispute.
3. 219
This is distinct from the possibility that an arbitrator might act to mitigate the consequences of a proper reading of the parties’
contractual terms, for example by adjusting the reparation owed in light of a contractual breach. In ICC Case No. 3344, for
example, two state entities entered into a three-year crude oil supply contract running from 1972 to 1974. At the end of 1973,
the price of oil increased dramatically and the contract was renegotiated. Under the new terms, the parties agreed a provisional
purchase price. The supplier then unilaterally fixed its own, higher price, by telex, to which the buyer did not respond. The
tribunal held that on a strict legal analysis the buyer by its silence had accepted the higher price, but that equity allowed the
tribunal to adjust the purchase price downward in order to moderate the undesirable effect of the rigid application of national
law. 309  This resonates with the approach taken in equity under the common law. 310
3. 220
In many (or perhaps most) cases, an arbitral tribunal will reach its decision based largely on a consideration of the facts and
on the provisions of the contract, whilst trying to ensure that these provisions do not operate unfairly to the detriment of one
or the other of the parties or are not clearly contrary to the true intent of the parties. French law, for example, allows the
arbitrators to act as amiables compositeurs, but requires them to satisfy certain standards. 311  The Paris Court of Appeal has
held that ‘arbitrators acting as amiables compositeurs have an obligation to ensure that their decision is equitable or else they
would betray their duty and give rise to a cause for annulment’. 312
3. 221
In the case of Benvenuti & Bonfant v Republic of Congo, which concerned an alleged expropriation of a joint venture, the
parties agreed that the ICSID tribunal could rule ex aquo et bono. In a passage illustrative of the boundaries that a tribunal
is likely to apply to its powers to act in equity, the tribunal held:
This principle of compensation in case of nationalization [ … ] constitutes one of the generally recognized
principles of international law as well as of equity. By reason of the above, the Government must therefore be
ordered to pay B&B damages, the quantum of which will be determined ex aequo et bono. 313
In addition to applying equitable principles in the quantification of damages, the tribunal also awarded the claimant moral
damages (albeit reducing the amount awarded to one fifth of the amount claimed), 314  and applied a rate of interest that it
considered appropriate ‘[b]y virtue of its power to rule ex aequo et bono’. 315
3. 222
For an ‘equity clause’ to be effective, there are, in principle, two basic requirements: first, that the parties have expressly
agreed to it; and secondly, that it should be permitted by the applicable law. Both requirements are seen in the UNCITRAL
Rules 1976, which provides: ‘The arbitral tribunal shall decide as amiable compositeur or ex aequo et bono only if the
parties have expressly authorised the arbitral tribunal to do so and if the law applicable to the arbitral procedure permits such
arbitration.’ 316  (The UNCITRAL Rules 2010 has dropped the second requirement, making reference only to the parties’
authorisation as a requirement.) 317  The ICC Rules, LCIA Rules, and SCC Rules all contain a similar provision. 318

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
23
3. 223
It is noteworthy that the UNCITRAL Rules refer to amiable compositeur and ex aequo et bono as distinct concepts. 319
Although a historical distinction has been drawn between them, 320  the increasing practice of international arbitral tribunals
appears to be to view both concepts as granting a discretion to arbitral tribunals to put aside strict legal rules and (subject
to what has already been said about the need to take account of trade rules, for instance) decide the dispute by reference to
general principles of fairness. 321
3. 224
The arbitration laws of some states go even further. They assume that the arbitrators will decide in equity unless it is expressly
stated that they must decide in law. This recalls a time when arbitration was considered a ‘friendly’ method of dispute
resolution, rather than the law-based process that it has become. If the arbitration is to take place in such a state, parties should
take care to specify if they do not want the arbitrators to decide in accordance with principles of equity. 322
Footnotes
150
In English private international law, it is also known as the ‘proper law’ of the contract.
151
Compagnie Tunisienne de Navigation SA v Compagnie d’Armement Maritime SA [1971] AC 572, at 603 per Lord
Diplock.
152
Kahler v Midland Bank Ltd [1950] AC 24, at 56. Similar problems have arisen in relation to Argentine investments
under which obligations payable in foreign currency were forcibly redenominated in Argentine pesos at a rate of one
dollar to one peso. This applied only to contracts governed by Argentinian law.
153
The point as to ‘legal rules’, by which is meant something other than a national system of law, is developed at paragraphs
3.147–3.224. The Model Law (and the UNCITRAL Rules) allows the parties to choose the ‘rules of law’ applicable to
their contract (which may include, e.g., the lex mercatoria), but stipulates that if the parties fail to make such a choice,
the arbitral tribunal shall apply ‘the law’ applicable to the dispute (which would not include the lex mercatoria).
154
See, e.g., Brazilian Arbitration Act 1996 (as amended in 2015), s. 2; English Arbitration Act, s. 46(1); French Code
of Civil Procedure, art. 1511; German ZPO, art. 1051(10); Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act, s. 28(b); Russian
International Arbitration Law 1993 (as amended in 2015), s. 28; Swiss PIL, art. 187(1). This approach is not universal,
and parties should note that there are some jurisdictions that will not enforce choice-of-law agreements and instead
prescribe the applicable law.
155
Lew, Applicable Law in International Commercial Arbitration (Oceana/Sigthoff & Noorthoff, 1978), p. 75.
156
Regulation (EC) No. 593/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 on the law applicable to
contractual obligations, OJ L 177/6, 4 July 2008 (Rome I Regulation).
157
Rome I Regulation, Art. 3(1). The Regulation does not apply to arbitration agreements, but the subject under discussion
here is not that of arbitration agreements, but of the contract between the parties under which a dispute has arisen.
158
ICSID Convention, Article 42.
159
UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 35.1.
160
Other examples include the Rules of the AAA 2013, International Centre for Dispute Resolution (ICDR) 2021, Art.
34.1; LCIA Rules 2020, Art. 22.3; the Rules of the Russian Federation’s Chamber of Commerce and Industry 2017, Art.
23.1; the SCC Rules 2017, Art. 22.1; the WIPO Rules, Art. 61.a; the Hague Conference on Private International Law,
Principles of Choice of Law in International Commercial Contracts, Art. 2.1.
161
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 21.1.
162
Lalive, cited in Lew, Applicable Law in International Commercial Arbitration (Oceana/Sigthoff & Noorthoff, 1978),
p. 87.
163
Rome I Regulation, Art. 3, provides that a choice of law, or a variation of a choice, can be made at any time after the
conclusion of the contract by agreement between the parties.
164
See Moss, ‘Can an arbitral tribunal disregard the choice of law made by the parties?’ (2005) 1 Stockholm Intl Arb Rev 6.
165
By way of illustration of the point, the European Court of Justice (ECJ), in Eco Swiss China Ltd v Benetton International
NV [1999] ECR I–3055, ruled that a breach of EU competition law constitutes a violation of the ordre public. In
Marketing Displays International Inc. v VR Van Raalte Reclame BV, Case Nos 04/694 and 04/695, 24 March 2005,

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
24
the Dutch Court of Appeal upheld a lower court’s refusal to grant exequatur to three US arbitral awards, because the
awards were considered incompatible with Art. 81 of the Treaty establishing the European Community of 2002, and
thus violated public policy.
166
Soleimany v Soleimany [1999] QB 785.
167
Ibid., p. 800.
168
Which, in this context, will be referred to as a ‘national’ system of law, the term being intended to cover not merely a
‘national law’ properly so-called, such as that of France (and, with it, applicable EU law), but also the law of a ‘state’
within a federal system, such as New York or California.
169
Sapphire International Petroleum Ltd v The National Iranian Oil Co. (1964) 13 ICLQ 1011.
170
Ibid., at 1012.
171
The UNIDROIT Principles provide examples of such clauses (see Art. 6.2.3 (Effects of Hardship) and Art. 7.1.7 (Force
Majeure)).
172
See Al Faruque, ‘Typologies, efficacy, and political economy of stabilisation clauses: A critical appraisal’ (2007) 4:5
OGEL 33; Maniruzzaman, ‘Damages for breach of stabilisation clauses in international investment law: Where do we
stand today?’ [2007] IELTR 11; Bernardini, ‘Stabilization and adaptation in oil and gas investments’ (2008) 1 J World
Energy L & Bus 98; Cotula, ‘Reconciling regulatory stability and evolution of environmental standards in investment
contracts: Towards a rethink of stabilization clauses’ (2008) 1 J World Energy L & Bus 158.
173
Maniruzzaman, in turn, divides economic equilibrium clauses into three categories: stipulated economic balancing
provisions, non-specified economic balancing provisions, and negotiated economic balancing provisions. See
Maniruzzaman, ‘Damages for breach of stabilisation clauses in international investment law: Where do we stand
today?’ [2007] IELTR 11, at 127ff.
174
For further discussion of economic equilibrium clauses, see Berger, ‘Renegotiation and adaptation of international
investment contracts: The role of contract drafters and arbitrators’ (2003) 36 Vanderbilt J Transl L 1348; Al Qurashi,
‘Renegotiation of international petroleum agreements’ (2005) 22 J Intl Arb 261.
175
Rome I Regulation, Art. 3(3).
176
See Chapter 2, paragraphs 2.135ff.
177
Mitsubishi Motor Corporation v Soler Chrysler-Plymouth (1986) XI YBCA 555.
178
Eco Swiss China Ltd v Benetton Investment NV [1999] ECR I–3055.
179
For a discussion of this subject, see Partasides and Burger, ‘The Swiss Federal Tribunal’s Decision of 8 March 2006:
A deepening of the arbitrator’s public policy dilemma?’ (2006) 3 Concurrences 26. See also Berman, ‘Navigating EU
law and the law of international arbitration’ (2012) 28 Arb Intl 397.
180
Czechoslovakia–Netherlands BIT 1991, Art. 8(6).
181
Slovak Republic v Achmea B.V., CJEU Case No. C-248/16, 6 March 2018, at 60 (‘Articles 267 and 344 TFEU must be
interpreted as precluding a provision in an international agreement concluded between Member States, such as Article
8 of the BIT, under which an investor from one of those Member States may, in the event of a dispute concerning
investments in the other Member State, bring proceedings against the latter Member State before an arbitral tribunal
whose jurisdiction that Member State has undertaken to accept’).
182
Slovak Republic v Achmea B.V., CJEU Case No. C-248/16, 6 March 2018, at 40–42.
183
Republic of Moldova v Komstroy, CJEU Case No. C-741/19, 2 September 2021, at 50–66. Achmea and Komstroy are
discussed further in Chapter 8.
184
Higgins, Problems Process: International Law and How We Use It (Clarendon Press, 1994), p. 39.
185
Ibid., p. 50.
186
See Chapter 8 in relation to the applicable law in disputes under investment treaties.
187
See discussion in Kotuby and Sobota, General Principles of Law and International Due Process: Principles and Norms
Applicable in Transnational Disputes (Oxford University Press, 2017), pp. 36, 44.
188
Compare the observation of the court in Orion Compania Espanola de Seguros v Belfort Maatschappij Voor Algemene
Verzekgringeen [1962] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 257, at 264, a case brought many years ago:
Thus, it may be, though perhaps it would be unusual, that the parties could validly agree that a part, or the
whole, of their legal relations should be decided by the arbitral tribunal on the basis of a foreign system
of law, or perhaps on the basis of principles of international law; e.g., in a contract to which a Sovereign
State was a party.
189
Higgins, Problems Process: International Law and How We Use It (Clarendon Press, 1994), p. 54.

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
25
190
Article 38 of the Statute of the ICJ (which was established in 1945 and is generally known as the ‘World Court’) states
that, in applying international law to the disputes before it, the Court is to apply, inter alia, those general principles of law.
191
Jennings and Watts, Oppenheim’s International Law, Vol. I (9th edn, Oxford University Press, 1992), p. 29, cited with
approval in Brownlie, Principles of Public International Law (Oxford University Press, 2012), p. 34. Professor Brownlie
goes on to add that, in practice, tribunals exercise considerable discretion in how they choose, edit, and adapt elements
of municipal jurisprudence: ibid., at p. 35.
192
Kotuby and Sobota, General Principles of Law and International Due Process: Principles and Norms Applicable in
Transnational Disputes (Oxford University Press, 2017), pp. 35–36. See also p. 37 (‘general principles have been relied
upon to guide or even correct the application of otherwise applicable domestic law when that law is underdeveloped,
unsuited for a transnational dispute or—in extreme cases—unable to meet minimum standards of propriety and
fairness’).
193
For an excellent (and, it must be admitted, detailed) work on this topic, see Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applied
by International Courts and Tribunals (Cambridge University Press, 1987).
194
See discussion in Kotuby and Sobota, General Principles of Law and International Due Process: Principles and Norms
Applicable in Transnational Disputes (Oxford University Press, 2017), p. 39 (‘general principles may usefully play an
auxiliary role, clarifying ambiguities and filling interstices’).
195
See, e.g., the discussion in Zuberbuhler and Schregenberger, ‘Corruption in Arbitration—The Arbitrator’s Duty to
Investigate’, in Muller, Besson, and Rigozzi (eds) New Developments in International Commercial Arbitration 2016
(Schulthess, 2016), pp. 18–19.
196
World Duty Free Company Limited v The Republic of Kenya, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/7 (Award of 4 October 2006),
at [157].
197
Ibid., at [120].
198
See, e.g., Alstom v Alexander Brothers, cour d’appel de Paris, 28 May 2019, Case No. 16/11182 (in which Alstom
challenged the enforcement of an arbitral award that ordered Alstom to pay outstanding invoices to Alexander Brothers,
on the grounds that the underlying contracts were tainted by illegality. The Paris Court of Appeal refused to enforce the
award because to do so would contravene international public policy).
199
See, e.g., Rome Convention, Art. 3(1) (‘By their choice the parties can select the law applicable to the whole or a part
only of the contract’); Rome I Regulation, Art. 3(1).
200
Part XIV of the Inter-American Juridical Committee, Guide on the Law Applicable to International Commercial
Contracts in the Americas 2019, Organisation of the American States, available online at http://www.oas.org/en/sla/dil/
docs/publications_Guide_Law_Applicable_International_Commercial_Contracts_Americas_2019.pdf.
201
Paulsson and Petrochilos, UNCITRAL Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2017), p. 318.
202
Ibid., p. 315.
203
See paragraph 3.206 below.
204
Model Law, Art. 28.
205
See paragraphs 3.131ff.
206
See the discussion of this Convention in Chapter 1.
207
Provided that the state has adopted the ICSID Convention.
208
ICSID Convention, Art. 42(1).
209
Rawding, ‘Protecting Investments under state contracts: Some legal and ethical issues’ (1995) 99 Arb Intl 341 describes
this option as subjecting national law to ‘international quality control’. The issue of applicable law in cases brought
under investment treaties is addressed in Chapter 8. For examples of ICSID cases resolved on the basis of international
law (to the extent that there were gaps in the applicable host state law, or where its application would have produced
a result inconsistent with international law), see Klöckner Industrie-Anlagen v Republic of Cameroon, ICSID Case No.
ARB/81/2, Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee, 3 May 1985; Amco Asia Corporation v Republic of Indonesia, ICSID
Case No. ARB/81/1, Ad Hoc Committee Decision on the Application for Annulment, 16 May 1986; Wena Hotels Ltd
v Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment Application, 5 February 2002; Sempra
Energy International v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award, 28 September 2007.
210
For a discussion of compensation, see Chapter 8.
211
Rome Convention, Art. 7.
212
Texaco Overseas Petroleum Co. v Government of Libyan Arab Republic (1978) 17 ILM 3; BP Exploration Co. (Libya)
Ltd v Government of the Libyan Arab Republic (1979) 53 ILR 297; Libyan American Oil Co. (Liamco) v Government of
the Libyan Arab Republic (1981) 20 ILM 1, (1981) VI YBCA 89. See also Greenwood, ‘State contracts in international
law: The Libyan oil arbitrations’ (1982) 17 ILM 14; Rigaux, ‘Des dieux et des héros: Réflexions sur une sentence

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
26
arbitrale’ [1978] Revue Critique de Droit International Privé 435; Stern, ‘Trois arbitrages, un même problème, trois
solutions’ [1980] Rev Arb 3.
213
For this text, see the Texaco arbitration, fn. 157.
214
‘The governing system of law is what that clause expressly provides—namely, in the absence of principles common to
the law of Libya and international law, the general principles of law, including such of those principles as may have
been applied by international tribunals’: BP, fn. 240, per Judge Lagergren.
215
Liamco, at 143. The fact that three different arbitrators could arrive at three different conclusions on the meaning of the
same choice-of-law clause highlights one of the weaknesses of the arbitral system, which is the possibility of conflicting
awards on the same basic problem: see Stern, ‘Trois arbitrages, un même problème, trois solutions’ [1980] Rev Arb 3.
216
American Independent Oil Co. Inc. (Aminoil) v Government of the State of Kuwait [1982] 21 ILM 976.
217
Ibid., at 980.
218
Ibid., at 1000.
219
Ibid., at 1001.
220
The tronc commun doctrine was first elaborated by Rubino-Sammartano in 1987: see Rubino-Sammartano, ‘Le tronc
commun des lois nationales en presence: Réflexions sur le droit applicable par l’arbitre international’ [1987] Rev Arb
133; Rubino-Sammartano, International Arbitration Law and Practice (Kluwer Law International, 1990), p. 274.
221
Sapphire International Petroleum Ltd v The National Iranian Oil Co. (1964) 13 ICLQ 1011.
222
Quoted ibid., at 1014.
223
Ibid., at 1015.
224
It is surprising in that the tronc commun is generally chosen as the ‘politically correct’ choice of law in cases involving
a foreign state, rather than cases involving only private parties.
225
Channel Tunnel Group Ltd and France Manche SA v Balfour Beatty Construction Ltd and ors [1993] AC 334, at [347].
226
When Eurotunnel sought an injunction to prevent Trans-Manche from carrying out a threat to cease work on part of
the project.
227
Channel Tunnel Group Ltd v Balfour Beatty Construction Ltd [1992] 1 QB 656, at [675].
228
Rubino-Sammartano, ‘The Channel Tunnel and the tronc commun doctrine’ (1993) 10 J Intl Arb 59, at 61, asserts that:
‘The Channel Tunnel contract is an example of an express choice by the parties and as such it does not seem to leave the
door open to possible argument. The view expressed by Staughton LJ, “I suspect it will lead to lengthy and expensive
dispute” cannot consequently be shared.’ In fact, as stated above, it was entirely accurate, in that two teams of lawyers,
French and English, had to be engaged by each of the parties in order to advise on the many disputes that arose. It is true
that the choice-of-law clause was clear; this is not the issue. What was not clear was what were the ‘common principles’
of French and English law that were applicable to the various different disputes that arose—including, e.g., disputes as
to whether a particular claim was or was not barred (or extinguished) by lapse of time.
229
Duval, ‘English and French law: The search for common principles’ (1997) 25 Intl Business Lawyer 181, at 182.
230
Channel Tunnel Group Ltd v Balfour Beatty Construction Ltd [1993] AC 334, at 368. In the same judgment, Lord Mustill
said, at 353, ‘having promised to take their complaints to the experts and if necessary to the arbitrators, that is where
the appellants should go’.
231
For further comment on the House of Lords’ decision, see Reymond, ‘The Channel Tunnel case and the law of
international arbitration’ (1993) 109 LQR 337; Veeder, ‘L’Arret Channel Tunnel de la Chambre des Lords’ (1993) 4
Rev Arb 705.
232
Rubino-Sammartano, ‘The Channel Tunnel and the tronc commun doctrine’ (1993) 10 J Intl Arb 59, at 61 (‘[T]he
common part of these two national laws must be treated as that chosen by the parties’).
233
The same division into specialist groups may be seen within law firms from which, increasingly, clients are seeking
specialist business sector advice or expertise.
234
This can be seen in White & Case and Queen Mary School of International Arbitration, University of London, 2010
International Arbitration Survey: Choices in International Arbitration, available online at https://arbitration.qmul.ac.uk/
media/arbitration/docs/2010_InternationalArbitrationSurveyReport.pdf, which indicated that 50 per cent of respondents
have ‘sometimes’ used transnational laws and rules to govern contracts.
235
Colombos, International Law of the Sea (6th edn, Prentice Hall Press, 1967).
236
Ibid.
237
Bowden, ‘L‘interdiction des se contredire au détriment d‘autrui (estoppel) as a Substantive Transnational Rule in
International Commercial Arbitration’, in Gaillard (ed.) ‘Transnational Rules in International Commercial Arbitration’,
ICC Publication No. 480/4 (ICC, 1993), p. 127.
238
See Goldman, ‘Lex mercatoria’ (1983) 3 Forum Internationale 21. The late Professor Goldman, having referred to the
codification of international commercial practices, such as the ICC’s Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
27
Credits (UCP)and Incoterms, as evidence of the emergence of an international business practice (on which, see
paragraph 3.201ff), stated, ibid., at 5:
Commentators in the early 1960s began to take note of this evolution. Clive Schmithoff was the first in
England to salute the new Law Merchant; in France, Philippe Kahn, with respect to international sales,
Philippe Fouchard, with respect to international arbitration and Jean Stoufflet, with respect to documentary
credits, undertook to study this law. As for myself, I concluded that a place could be acknowledged for
the lex mercatoria—a name which stuck—within the boundaries of the law.
239
Ibid., at 3.
240
Ibid.
241
Goldman, ‘La lex mercatoria dans les contrats d’arbitrage internationaux: Réalité et perspectives’ (1979) 106 Clunet
J du Droit Intl 475; Lalive, ‘Transnational (or truly international) public policy and international arbitration’ (1986)
3 ICC Congress Series 257; see generally Gaillard (ed.) ‘Transnational Rules in International Arbitration 1993’, ICC
Publication No. 480/4 (ICC, 1993) (a very helpful review of aspects of transnational law by distinguished contributors).
242
See, e.g., Mustill LJ, ‘The new lex mercatoria: The first twenty-five years’ (1987) 4 Arb Intl 86, at 86, in which he
notes that ‘[t]he Lex Mercatoria has sufficient intellectual credentials to merit serious study, and yet is not so generally
accepted as to escape the sceptical eye’.
243
See, e.g., Delaume, ‘The proper law of state contracts and the lex mercatoria: A reappraisal’ (1988) 3 ICSID Rev—
Foreign Investments LJ 79, at 106, where this experienced international practitioner suggests that the risk of changes
in state law to the detriment of the private party to a state contract may be insured under the Convention Establishing
the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (1985) 24 ILM 1589, and that this is far more adapted to the commercial
realities ‘than the Lex Mercatoria which remains, both in scope and in practical significance, an elusive system and a
mythical view of a transnational law of State Contracts whose sources are elsewhere’.
244
See, e.g., Mann, ‘The proper law in the conflict of laws’ (1987) 36 ICLQ 437, at 448; Toope, Mixed International
Arbitration (Grotius, 1990), in particular p. 96, where the author concludes: ‘It would appear that the so-called lex
mercatoria is largely an effort to legitimise as “law” the economic interests of Western corporations.’
245
Goldman, ‘La lex mercatoria dans les contrats d’arbitrage internationaux: Réalité et perspectives’ (1979) 106 Clunet
J du Droit Intl 475, at 481.
246
Although Professor Goldman himself contended that it was part of a legal order.
247
Goldman, ‘La lex mercatoria dans les contrats d’arbitrage internationaux: Réalité et perspectives’ (1979) 106 Clunet
J du Droit Intl 475, at 496.
248
Both the ICC Rules 2021, Art. 21.2, and the UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 35.3, require arbitrators to take account of
relevant trade usages.
249
See, e.g., Berger, The Creeping Codification of the New Lex Mercatoria (Kluwer Law International, 2011). See also
Mustill LJ, ‘The new lex mercatoria: The first twenty-five years’ (1987) 4 Arb Intl 86—although the author thought
the results ‘a modest haul for twenty-five years of international arbitration’. See too Paulsson, ‘La lex mercatoria dans
l’arbitrage de la CCI’ [1990] Rev Arb 55; Dalhuisen, ‘Legal orders and their manifestation: The operation of the
international commercial and financial legal order and its lex mercatoria’ (2006) 24 BJIL 129, at 179ff.
250
Berger, The Creeping Codification of Lex Mercatoria (Kluwer Law International, 1999), p. 192.
251
Translex is available online at http://www.trans-lex.org
252
Fortier, ‘The new, new lex mercatoria, or back to the future’ (2001) 17 Arb Intl 121, at 126.
253
Gaillard, ‘Transnational law: A legal system or a method of decision-making?’ (2001) 17 Arb Intl 62.
254
Ibid., at 60; see also Fortier, ‘The new, new lex mercatoria, or back to the future’ (2001) 17 Arb Intl 121, at 126.
255
Gaillard, ‘Transnational law: A legal system or a method of decision-making?’ (2001) 17 Arb Intl 62 at 64.
256
Molineaux, ‘Applicable law in arbitration: The coming convergence of civil and Anglo-Saxon law via Unidroit and lex
mercatoria’ (2000) 1 JWIT 127, at 130.
257
Fortier, ‘The new, new lex mercatoria, or back to the future’ (2001) 17 Arb Intl 121, at 124–125.
258
Except on procedural matters, which are not under consideration here.
259
Mayer, ‘The UNIDROIT Principles in contemporary contract practice’ (2002) ICC Bulletin (Special Supplement) 111.
260
For instance, in authorising arbitrators to choose the governing law of the contract, where the parties have not done so,
without necessarily following the conflict rules of the place of arbitration.
261
Lew, ‘Is there a “global free-standing body of substantive arbitration law?” ’, in van den Berg (ed.) International
Arbitration: The Coming of a New Age? (Kluwer Law International, 2013), pp. 53–61.

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
28
262
Compare the statement of Lord Mustill in Channel Tunnel Group Ltd v Balfour Beatty Construction Ltd [1993] AC
334, at 353 (‘[H]aving promised to take their complaints to the experts and if necessary to the arbitrators, that is where
the appellants should go’).
263
At its conference in Cairo, April 1992.
264
Quoted in ICC, Transnational Rules in International Commercial Arbitration, ICC Publication No. 480/4 (ICC, 1993),
p. 247. Note, however, that if no choice of law has been made by the parties, the arbitral tribunal may not be free to
choose anything other than national law. This is because the relevant rules of arbitration, or the relevant state law, may
not allow any other option.
265
Banque du Proche-Orient v Société Fougerolle, Cass. Civ. 2eme, 9 December 1981 (second decision) and Cass. Civ.
1ere, 22 October 1991; Judgment of the Austrian Supreme Court, 18 November 1982, reproduced in (1984) IX YBCA
161; Deutsche Schachtbau und Tiefbohrgesellschaft GmbH (F/Germ) v R’as Al Khaimah National Oil Co. (R’as Al
Khaimah, UAE) Shell International Petroleum Co. Ltd (UK) [1987] 3 WLR 1023, rev’d on other grounds [1990] 1 AC
295. See also Rivkin, ‘Enforceability of awards based on lex mercatoria’ (1993) 19 Arb Intl 47.
266
The current version of which is the UCP 600, published in 2007: ICC Publication No. 600.
267
The latest version of which is the 2020 edition: ICC Publication No. E723E. Both Incoterms and documentary credits
are discussed with trade usages at paragraph 3.206.
268
See paragraphs 3.192, 3.195, and 3.196.
269
The UNIDROIT Principles were revised in May 2016 and are available online at https://www.unidroit.org/instruments/
commercial-contracts/unidroit-principles-2016/
270
For example, Article 1.7 states: ‘(1) Each party must act in accordance with good faith and fair dealing in international
trade. (2) The parties may not exclude or limit this duty.’
271
See van Houtte, ‘The UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts’ (1995) 11 Arb Intl 373, at 374.
272
UNIDROIT has published a commentary on the revised principles entitled UNIDROIT Principles of International
Commercial Contracts, 2016, available online at https://www.unidroit.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/Unidroit-
Principles-2016-English-i.pdf .
273
More precisely, the opening words to the Preamble to the UNIDROIT Principles state: These Principles set forth general
rules for international commercial contracts. They shall be applied when the parties have agreed that their contract
be governed by them. They may be applied when the parties have agreed that their contract be governed by general
principles of law, the lex mercatoria or the like. They may be applied when the parties have not chosen any law to govern
their contract. They may be used to interpret or supplement international uniform law instruments. They may be used
to interpret or supplement domestic law. They may serve as a model for national and international legislators.
274
For a review of the application of the UNIDROIT Principles in arbitration practice, see Piers and Erauw, ‘Application
of the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts in Arbitration’ (2012) 8 J Priv Intl L 441.
275
Now Art. 27.1 of SCC Rules 2017 (‘The Arbitral Tribunal shall decide the merits of the dispute on the basis of the law(s)
or rules of law agreed upon by the parties. In the absence of such agreement, the Arbitral Tribunal shall apply the law
or rules of law that it considers most appropriate’).
276
See Arbitration Institute of the SCC, Stockholm Arbitration Report (SCC, 2002), p. 59, with commentary by Fernandez-
Armesto.
277
In the same manner as an exemption clause might be disregarded under domestic legislation to protect consumers.
278
UNIDROIT Principles, Art. 7.1.6.
279
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 21.2; UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 35.3.
280
Model Law, Art. 28(4).
281
Netherlands Arbitration Act, Art. 1054(4).
282
See paragraph 3.197 above.
283
For example, the constitutions of Yemen, Qatar, and Egypt state that Shari’ah is a primary source of law.
284
See Majeed, ‘Good faith and due process: Lessons from the Shari’ah’ (2004) 20 Arb Intl 97.
285
See Darwazeh, ‘Arbitration in the Arab world: An interview with Professor Ahmed Sadek El-Kosheri’ (2008) 25 J Intl
Arb 203.
286
Sanghi Polyesters Ltd (India) v The International Investor KCFC (Kuwait) [2000] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 480.
287
See also Musawi v R E International (UK) Ltd and ors [2007] EWHC 2981, discussed at paragraph 3.214.
288
Fadlallah, ‘Arbitration facing conflicts of culture: The 2008 Freshfields Lecture’ (2009) 25 Arb Intl 303.
289
See, e.g., Beximco Pharmaceuticals Ltd and ors v Shamil Bank of Bahrain EC [2004] EWCA Civ 19, discussed by
Fadlallah, ibid. Also of interest is a question posed in the English parliament on 15 December 2008 regarding which
‘Islamic tribunals’ have authority to act under the English Arbitration Act. The Minister for Business, Enterprise and

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
29
Regulatory Reform responded that there is ‘no specific provision in the Arbitration Act 1996 for “Islamic Tribunals”’,
but that ‘[t]he Act allows all parties to have their disputes decided by a set of principles of their choice rather than by
national law’: HC Deb, 15 December 2008, cols 465–466W. He also referred to the Muslim Arbitration Tribunal (MAT),
established in 2007 to provide an alternative route to resolve civil issues in accordance with Shari’ah principles. The
MAT operates according to the principles of the English Arbitration Act.
290
Fadlallah, ibid., at fn. 320.
291
Sheikh Abu Dhabi v Petroleum Development Ltd [1952] ICLQ 247.
292
Ruler of Qatar v International Marine Oil Co. Ltd (1956) 20 Int L Rep 534.
293
Aramco v Government of Saudi Arabia (1963) 27 Int L Rep 117.
294
Sheikh Abu Dhabi v Petroleum Development Ltd [1952] ICLQ 247.
295
Fadlallah, ‘Arbitration facing conflicts of culture: The 2008 Freshfields Lecture’ (2009) 25 Arb Intl 303.
296
Emphasis added.
297
French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1496; Swiss PIL, art. 187. The ICC Rules 2021 also now refer to ‘the rules of
law’ (in Art. 21) rather than to ‘the law’ to be applied.
298
Model Law, Art. 28(2). Despite the early approach of the common law to require tribunals to apply a fixed and
recognisable system of law, the adoption of the Model Law in various common law countries, including Australia,
Canada, Hong Kong, and New Zealand, means that there is now growing express recognition of the concept.
299
English Arbitration Act, s. 46.
300
Musawi v R E International (UK) Ltd and ors [2007] EWHC 2981.
301
Halpern v Halpern [2007] EWCA Civ 291.
302
As noted earlier, however, an arbitration agreement must be governed by the law of a country (in this case, Swiss or
English law—the decision was never made) and cannot be governed by Jewish law.
303
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 21.1 (‘The parties shall be free to agree upon the rules of law to be applied by the arbitral tribunal
to the merits of the dispute. In the absence of any such agreement, the arbitral tribunal shall apply the rules of law which
it determines to be appropriate.’)
304
For example, they may choose general principles of law, or the lex mercatoria, or the UNIDROIT Principles.
305
Several civil law countries provide for the possibility that an arbitrator can act as an amiable compositeur. For example,
Italian civil procedure provides for the courts to decide the merits of a dispute in equita when the dispute concerns rights
which the parties are entitled to waive and the parties jointly request the court to do so. See Codice di Procedura Civile
(as amended in 2021), s. 114. The same authority is given to arbitrators in s. 822. There is a similar provision in the
Swiss PIL, art. 187(2). Egypt’s arbitration law refers to both the power to act as an amiable compositeur as well as the
power to ‘adjudicate the merits of the dispute in conformity with the rules of justice and fairness (ex aequo et bono)’.
See Egyptian Arbitration Act, 1994, Art. 39(4).
306
Model Law, Art. 28(3) and (4).
307
For the view that such a departure is or ought to be permissible in the interests of fairness and justice, see Kiffer, ‘Amiable
Composition and ICC Arbitration’ (2007) 18(1) ICC Court of Arbitration Bulletin 50. The Court of Appeal of Quebec,
Canada, took the opposite view in the case of Coderre v Coderre (2008 QCCA 888), Court of Appeal of Quebec, 13
May 2008. In that case, the court found that an arbitrator had exceeded his mandate as amiable compositeur under the
Model Law by deciding to ignore two provisions of the parties’ contractual accounting formula.
308
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 21.2.
309
ICC Award No. 3344 of 1981 noted in Jarvin and Derains, Collection of ICC Arbitral Awards 1974–1985, Vol. I (Kluwer
Law & Taxation/ ICC Publishing, 1990), p. 444.
310
See, e.g., Cavendish Square Holding BV v Talal El Makdessi; PakingEye Limited v Beavis [2015] UKSC 67, at [32]
where the UK Supreme Court upheld the common law position that a liquidated damages clause can be struck down as
penal where ‘the clause imposes a detriment on the contract breaker out of all proportion to any legitimate interest of
the innocent party in the enforcement of the primary obligation’.
311
See Loquin, L’Amiable Compositeur en Droit Comparé et International: Contribution à l’Étude du Non-Droit dans
l’Arbitrage International (Librairie Techniques, 1980).
312
Cour d’appel de Paris, 11 January 1996, 351.
313
Benvenutit and Bonfant SARL v The Government of the People’s Republic of Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/77/2, Award,
8 August 1980, at [4.65].
314
Ibid., at [4.96] (‘[ … ] the Tribunal considers it equitable to award [B&B] the sum of CFA 5,000,000 as damages for
intangible loss’).
315
Ibid at [4.98].

Section D. - Law Applicable to the Substance, UKBC-REDFERN 530638617 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
30
316
UNCITRAL Rules 1976, Art. 33.2.
317
UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 35.2.
318
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 21.3; LCIA Rules 2020, Art. 22.4; SCC Rules 2017, Art. 27.3.
319
Paulsson and Petrochilos, UNCITRAL Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2017), p. 320 (‘These terms appear as
separate, alternate concepts in both the 1976 and 2010 Rules, because the Working Group hoped to accommodate the
different terms existing in various legal systems and literature.’)
320
See Rubino-Sammartano, ‘Amiable compositor (joint mandate to settle) and ex bono et aequo (discretional authority
to mitigate strict law): Apparent synonyms revisited’ (1992) 9 J Intl Arb 5.
321
See Grierson and van Hooft, Arbitrating under the 2012 ICC Rules (Kluwer Law International, 2012), pp. 319–
335 (glossary entries for amiable compositeur and ex aequo et bono); Halsbury’s Laws of England, Vol. 2 (5th
edn, LexisNexis, 2008), footnote to para. 1208; Born, International Commercial Arbitration (2nd edn, Kluwer Law
International, 2014), pp. 2770–2776.
322
See, e.g., the Ecuador Arbitration and Mediation Law 1997 (as amended in 2021), Art. 3 (‘Las partes indicarán si los
árbitros deben decidir en equidad o en derecho, a falta de convenio, el fallo será en equidad’, or ‘The parties will decide
whether the arbitrator shall decide in law or in equity. Unless otherwise agreed, the award shall be in equity’ (authors’
translation)).
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
