Case Management Issues, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406927 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Case Management Issues
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Case Management Issues
24-21
With respect to case management for all ICC arbitrations, the usual approach is to raise various procedural issues with the parties
prior to the case management conference so that the parties may express their preferences as to the procedure. In this context,
it is useful to refer to the case management techniques but without seeking to discuss each of them at the case management
conference. Some of the issues referred to in App.IV, such as bifurcation or the manner of producing documents, are frequently
dealt with at this stage. Other issues, such as whether it is necessary to have hearings on certain issues should normally be limited
to basic procedural issues, such as the language of the arbitration and perhaps the applicable law to the contract. In addition,
at this stage, the Tribunal is not usually in an ideal position to decide on issues such as the length of submissions or witness
evidence. Usually, at this stage, the parties may only be able to provide a rough indication as to the number of witnesses—subject
to the evidence submitted by the other side. As regards settlement, the issue would also appear to be premature at this stage.
24-22
If one or more parties are not participating, there is an issue as to whether the Tribunal is required to or should hold a case
management conference. Usually, if there is a party default, the Tribunal will propose a case management conference and invite
the parties to confirm their availability. If the defaulting party confirms that it will not attend or does not respond, then that party
is waiving its right to participate in the case management conference. If the other parties waive the case management conference,
there is no need that it be held and it may be preferable to deal with procedural issues in writing. If such issues are dealt with
in writing, there will be a clear documentary record of the participating party’s submissions and the Tribunal’s response.
24-23
If a hearing is held and the defaulting party does not attend, then the defaulting party has waived its right to object to the
hearing itself under art.40. Nevertheless, as with any hearing, the Tribunal should notify the defaulting party of what transpired
by preparing summary of the meeting. The better view is that a party failing to attend waives its right to challenge matters
decided at that meeting, provided that there is a clear record of what was to be dealt with at the meeting. Therefore, although
the defaulting party should be provided with minutes of the meeting, and a Tribunal should carefully consider any comments
with respect thereto, it would be disruptive of the proceedings to permit the defaulting party to ignore the case management
meeting and then challenge matters decided at it on the basis that it did not participate.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
