Requests to Produce by Parties, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406952 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Requests to Produce by Parties
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Requests to Produce by Parties
25-57
Article 3(2) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides that any party may submit a “Request to Produce”. The timing of such
“Request to Produce” is not specified although art.3(11) of those Rules provides for subsequent requests which may imply
that the initial request will be made shortly after the Terms of Reference. 386  However, frequently in international arbitration,
unlike in American litigation, the Request to Produce will be made after certain memorials have been filed, i.e. quite often
after the first round of written submissions in particular the Statement of Claim and the Statement of Defense. There are, of
course, other ways of proceeding, and in some cases, it may be necessary to start with the production of document process even
before the filing of the Statement of Claim. Requests may also be made, for instance, on a rolling basis, where the claimant
sets out in the Statement of Claim the document it wishes the respondent to disclose, and the respondent does likewise in the
Statement of Defense as regards documents the claimant is requested to disclose. The other party can then accept or object to
the request. In the latter case, the Tribunal will want to make an order before the addressee of the request files its next brief.
This way of proceeding avoids the often huge time gap between the first and second round of proceedings that is devoted to
the document disclosure process.
25-58
Pursuant to art.3(3) of the IBA Rules on Evidence, a Request to Produce shall contain:
 
“(a)(i) a description of each requested Document sufficient to identify it, or (ii) a description in sufficient
detail (including subject matter) of a narrow and specific requested category of Documents that are reasonably
believed to exist; in the case of Documents maintained in electronic form, the requesting Party may, or the
Arbitral tribunal may order that it shall be required to, identify specific files, search terms, individuals or
other means of searching for such Documents in an efficient and economical manner;
 
(b)a statement as to how the Documents requested are relevant to the case and material to its outcome; and
 
(c)(i) a statement that the Documents requested are not in the possession, custody or control of the requesting
Party or a statement of the reasons why it would be unreasonably burdensome for the requesting Party to
produce such Documents, and (ii) a statement of the reasons why the requesting Party assumes the Documents
requested are in the possession, custody or control of another Party.”
25-59
The last point is sometimes overlooked in practice, as it means that any correspondence exchanged between the parties falls
outside the boundaries of admissible discovery requests, and therefore does not have to be disclosed. 387  The most important
and at the same time most difficult point in practice relates to the second item, the need to show relevance and materiality to
the outcome of the case. These are discussed below.
25-60
Article 3(3) of the IBA Rules does not define the form in which the Request to Produce is to be submitted. In practice, many
parties use what has become known as the Redfern Schedule, named after a leading English arbitration practitioner, Alan
Redfern. It contains in general six columns: (1) the number of the request, (2) the Documents requested (with a description
thereof), (3) the Reasons for the Request (ie its relevance and materiality), (4) Responses/Objections to the Request, (5) the Reply
of the Requesting party to the Responses/Objections to Request and (6) the Tribunal’s Decision. The French counterpart of the

Requests to Produce by Parties, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406952 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Redfern Schedule is the Stern Schedule, named after French professor and investment arbitration specialist Brigitte Stern. 388  It
has the same content as the Redfern Schedule, but instead of columns (in the portrait format), uses rows (in a landscape format),
which allow a more user-friendly presentation.
25-61
Article 3(4) of the IBA Rules on Evidence sets out the basic requirement that a party produce the requested documents, unless
the party makes an objection under art.3(5), which provides that:
“If the Party to whom the Request to Produce is addressed has an objection to some or all of the Documents
requested, it shall state the objection in writing to the Arbitral Tribunal and the other Parties within the time
ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal. The reasons for such objection shall be any of those set forth in Articles 9.2 or
9.3 or a failure to satisfy any of the requirements of Article 3.3.” 389
25-62
Article 3(6) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides that:
 
“6.Upon receipt of any such objection and response, the Arbitral Tribunal may invite the relevant Parties to
consult with each other with a view to resolving the objection.”
25-63
Article 3(8) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides for review of a disputed document by either the Tribunal or an expert. In
the authors’ experience, in camera reviews of documents by the Tribunal are very rare in ICC arbitrations.
25-64
Article 3(9) of the IBA Rules on Evidence makes provision for requests for documents from persons or organisations that are
not parties. 390  This provision fits in with various provisions of national law that allow arbitrators or parties in arbitrations to
have recourse to national courts for production of evidence from third parties. 391
25-65
As regards the procedure, the Request to Produce provides an opportunity for the lawyer requesting the documents to educate
the Tribunal as to a specific issue in the case and the documents that the other side should have in its control with respect to that
issue. Therefore, aside from obtaining the documents or an adverse inference if the documents are not produced, the highlighting
of a material issue is of importance given the quantity of submissions that the parties frequently make in arbitrations.
25-66
The first issue with respect to a Request to Produce is the relevance of the documents. Unlike courts in common law countries,
Tribunals generally wish to see a demonstrated relevance of the document request to the issues in the case. For many international
arbitrators, the fact that documents may be relevant is not sufficient and documents that are relevant only to qualify the credibility
of a witness may be considered irrelevant to the issues in the case. In addition, art.3(7) of the IBA Rules on Evidence refers to
issues that one party “wishes to prove” to support its case and not simply to contest the case of the other side. 392  Therefore,
it raises the issue of whether a Request to Produce should be granted if it is aimed solely at the production of documents that
are required to contest the case of the other side. 393
25-67
Another issue is what is meant by a “narrow and specific requested category of documents”. Here practices vary widely and,
in many instances, the difference in approach between common law and civil law jurisdictions becomes evident. For example,
for common law lawyers, requests for “minutes of directors’ meetings” or “account statements for account no.1234” or “import
authorisations relating to computer hard drives” are narrow and specific categories of documents. For other lawyers, the issue
may be which directors’ meetings and why, which account statements and which import authorisations. Dealing with these
issues will depend on various factors, including the composition of the Tribunal, the origin of the parties and/or their counsel,

Requests to Produce by Parties, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406952 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
and perhaps the place of arbitration. 394  Another issue is the production of electronic documents, which has been the subject of
a report by the ICC Arbitration Commission entitled “Managing E-Document Production”.
25-68
Article 6(3) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides that a Tribunal-appointed expert has the right to request documents. 395
This is typical of civil law expertise proceedings where a court-appointed expert regularly demands explanations and documents
from the parties. In fact, such proceedings can be as intrusive as common law discovery. 396
25-69
The issue of privilege also arises in document production. The issue of which law governs the issue of privilege is a thorny
one that is unresolved. Several factors are usually relevant in dealing with issues of privilege. The parties have to be treated
equally. Therefore, ordering production from one party of documents that would be privileged if in the position of the other
party may raise due process issues. Privilege is related to national law and the place where a lawyer (or other professional)
practices. Therefore, at least initially the law of that place should be used to determine the scope of the privilege. 397
25-70
In the Reineccius case, 398  the Tribunal analysed a claim for privilege in an ad hoc arbitration applying, in part, international
law, in the following terms:
“The attorney-client privilege, which is widely applied in domestic legal systems, has been recognized in public
international and international commercial arbitration rules and arbitral awards. The privilege applies to corporate
entities as well as to individuals; when claimed for corporate entities, it obtains with respect to those who are
authorised to participate in the decisions. The attorney-client privilege has, in addition, been recognized and
applied with respect to international organisations. At the core of the attorney-client privilege in both domestic and
international law is the appreciation that those who must make decisions on their own or others’ behalf are entitled
to seek and receive legal advice and that the provision of a full canvass of legal options and the exploration and
evaluation of their legal implications would be chilled, were counsel and their clients not assured in advance that
the advice proffered, along with communications related to it, would remain confidential and immune to discovery.
Ratione materiae, the legal communications which are entitled to an attorney-client privilege must be related to
making a decision that is in or is in contemplation of legal contention; ratione personae, the legal communications
must be between an attorney (whether in-house or outside) and those who are afforded his or her professional
advice for purposes of making or in contemplation of that decision. Legal communications which would qualify for
privilege on the basis of these criteria may lose their privileged status if the party entitled to it waives the privilege
by word or deed or voluntarily publicizes the substance of the legal communications beyond the circle of those
who are authorised to make or participate in the making of the decision. In addition, in circumstances in which
the privilege is abused by using it in ways that would unfairly benefit the party entitled to it and unfairly prejudice
the other party—the so-called ‘sword and shield rule’ as it is called in United States’ federal jurisprudence—the
privilege will not be given effect. As the Court said in US v Bilzerian, the attorney-client privilege cannot be used
as a shield and a sword … A defendant may not use the privilege to prejudice his opponent’s case or to disclose
some selected communications for self-serving purposes.” (footnote deleted)
25-71
The Reineccius case is a useful discussion of the principles; the fundamental one is that a Tribunal must address the issue
of the rationae materiae (the material to be covered), rationae personae (the persons to be covered) and the issue of waiver.
Depending on the national origins of the parties, each of these issues may be treated somewhat differently. However, there are
a number of cross-border examples of principles 399  and a more generalised acceptance that privilege applies to persons such
as in-house counsel.

Requests to Produce by Parties, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406952 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
Footnotes
386
Article 3(11) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides: “11. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, the Parties
may submit to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the other Parties any additional Documents on which they intend to rely or
which they believe have become relevant to the case and material to its outcome as a consequence of the issues raised in
Documents, Witness Statements or Expert Reports submitted or produced, or in other submissions of the Parties.” See
also Hafter, “The Provisions on the Discovery of Internal Documents in the IBA Rules of 1999” in Liber Amicorum
Robert Briner, op. cit., p.347.
387
Unless the requesting party is no longer in possession of the correspondence it sent to and received from the other party.
388
Born, International Commercial Arbitration, 3rd edn (2021), pp.2523–2524; Lal, Casey, et al., “Abuse of Document
Production in International Arbitration: Remedies When the Adverse Inference Falls Short”, (2020) Int. J. Arb. Vol.86
No.4, p.394.
389
Article 9.2 of the IBA Rules on Evidence states: “2. The Arbitral Tribunal shall, at the request of a Party or on its
own motion, exclude from evidence or production any Document, statement, oral testimony or inspection for any of
the following reasons: (a) lack of sufficient relevance to the case or materiality to its outcome; (b) legal impediment or
privilege under the legal or ethical rules determined by the Arbitral Tribunal to be applicable; (c) unreasonable burden to
produce the requested evidence; (d) loss or destruction of the document that has been shown with reasonable likelihood
to have occurred; (e) grounds of commercial or technical confidentiality that the Arbitral Tribunal determines to be
compelling; (f) grounds of special political or institutional sensitivity (including evidence that has been classified as
secret by a government or a public international institution) that the Arbitral Tribunal determines to be compelling; or
(g) considerations of procedural economy, proportionality, fairness or equality of the Parties that the Arbitral Tribunal
determines to be compelling”. Article 3.3 of the IBA Rules on Evidence states: “3. A Request to Produce shall contain:
(a) (i) a description of each requested Document sufficient to identify it, or (ii) a description in sufficient detail (including
subject matter) of a narrow and specific requested category of Documents that are reasonably believed to exist; in the
case of Documents maintained in electronic form, the requesting Party may, or the Arbitral Tribunal may order that it
shall be required to, identify specific files, search terms, individuals or other means of searching for such Documents
in an efficient and economical manner; (b) a statement as to how the Documents requested are relevant to the case
and material to its outcome; and (c) (i) a statement that the Documents requested are not in the possession, custody or
control of the requesting Party or a statement of the reasons why it would be unreasonably burdensome for the requesting
Party to produce such Documents, and (ii) a statement of the reasons why the requesting Party assumes the Documents
requested are in the possession, custody or control of another Party.
390
Article 3(9) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides: “9. If a Party wishes to obtain the production of Documents from
a person or organisation who is not a Party to the arbitration and from whom the Party cannot obtain the Documents
on its own, the Party may, within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, ask it to take whatever steps are legally
available to obtain the requested Documents, or seek leave from the Arbitral Tribunal to take such steps itself. The
Party shall submit such request to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the other Parties in writing, and the request shall contain
the particulars set forth in Article 3.3, as applicable. The Arbitral Tribunal shall decide on this request and shall take,
authorize the requesting Party to take, or order any other Party to take, such steps as the Arbitral Tribunal considers
appropriate if, in its discretion, it determines that (i) the Documents would be relevant to the case and material to its
outcome, (ii) the requirements of Article 3.3, as applicable, have been satisfied and (iii) none of the reasons for objection
set forth in Article 9.2 applies.”
391
For a discussion, see Webster, “Obtaining Evidence from Third Parties in International Arbitration” (2001) Arbitration
Int. Vol.17 No.2, p.143 at p.147. See also Born, International Commercial Arbitration, 2nd edn (Kluwer Law
International, 2014), para.16.03); Blackaby, Partasides, et al, Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration, 6th edn
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015) paras 7.37–7.38.
392
A party has the burden of proving the case it advances. If a party fails to provide evidence to support its case, it generally
will fail. The other party is not required to disprove the case and therefore some arbitrators deem it inappropriate to
request documents that are solely designed for that purpose.
393
The justification for the limitation is that documentary production should be restricted to areas in which the requesting
party has the burden of proof.
394
The Working Group gave the following example in its commentary of the IBA Rules on Evidence (at p.7): “For example,
if an arbitration involved the termination by one party of a joint venture agreement, the other party may know that the

Requests to Produce by Parties, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406952 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
notice of the termination was given on a certain date, that the Board of the other party must have made the decision to
terminate at a meeting shortly before that notice and that certain documents must have been prepared for the Board’s
consideration of that decision and minutes must have been taken concerning the decision. The requesting party cannot
identify the dates or the authors of such documents, but nevertheless the requesting party can identify with some
particularity the nature of the documents sought and the general time frame in which they would have been prepared.
Such a Request may qualify as a ‘narrow and specific category of documents as permitted under Article 3.3(a)(ii)’.”
395
The provision in the 2020 IBA Rules states: “3. Subject to the provisions of Article 9.2 and 9.3, the Tribunal-Appointed
Expert may request a Party to provide any information or to provide access to any Documents, goods, samples, property,
machinery, systems, processes or site for inspection, to the extent relevant to the case and material to its outcome. The
Parties and their representatives shall have the right to receive any such information and to attend any such inspection.
Any disagreement between a Tribunal-Appointed Expert and a Party as to the relevance, materiality or appropriateness
of such a request shall be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal, in the manner provided in Articles 3.5 through 3.8. The
Tribunal-Appointed Expert shall record in the Expert Report any non-compliance by a Party with an appropriate request
or decision by the Arbitral Tribunal and shall describe its effects on the determination of the specific issue.” The current
provision of the IBA Rules deleted the statement that the expert had the same authority to request documents as the
Tribunal.
396
Common law discovery is based on correspondence and requests. In court-appointed expert hearings, they are frequently
made immediately. The requests for explanations or documents are subsequently confirmed in writing by the expert.
See also, Jarrosson, “L’expertise Juridique” in Liber amicorum Claude Reymond, op. cit., p.127; Poudret, “Expertise
et droit d’être entendu dans l’arbitrage international” in Etudes de droit international en l’honneur de Pierre Lalive, op.
cit., p.607.
397
See for example European Court of First Instance, 17 September 2007, Akzo Nobel Chemicals Ltd and Akcros Chemicals
Ltd v Commission of the European Communities, joined case 62003A0253 (T–122/03 and T–253/03) (Commission’s
powers of investigation—documents seized in the course of an investigation—legal professional privilege protecting
communications between lawyers and their clients—admissibility). See also Rosher, “Legal privilege et confidentialité
des communications avocat-client en matière d’arbitrage international—Vers une possible harmonisation?”, Les
Cahiers de l’Arbitrage No.2007/3, p.21 and “The Application and Scope of Attorney-Client Privilege in International
Arbitration” SIAR 2007:2, p.1.
398
See Dr Horst Reineccius v Bank for International Settlements, Respondent (Claim No.1); First Eagle SoGen Funds, Inc.,
Claimant v Bank for International Settlements, Respondent (Claim No.2); Pierre Mathieu and la Société Hippique de
la Châtre, Claimants v Bank for International Settlements, Respondent (Claim No.3), 11 June 2002, Procedural Order
No.6.
399
See for example the Code for Conduct for Lawyers in the European Union which provides: “5.3.1. If a lawyer sending
a communication to a lawyer in another Member State, which the sender wishes it to remain confidential or without
prejudice he or she should clearly express this intention prior to communicating the documents 5.3.2. If the prospective
recipient of the communication is unable to ensure their status as confidential or without prejudice he or she should
inform the sender accordingly without delay” (http://www.ccbe.eu/documents/publications/ [accessed 17 August 2021]).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
