Application to a judicial authority “shall not be deemed to..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Application to a judicial authority “shall not be deemed to be an
infringement or a waiver of the arbitration agreement”
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Application to a judicial authority “shall not be deemed to be an infringement or a waiver of the arbitration
agreement”
28-79
A party is entitled to seek interim or conservatory measures from a national court and yet insist that the overall dispute be
submitted to arbitration rather than to the national courts. 534  This provision may be important as the court before which the
interim measures are sought is often the court where the other party is based and therefore may be a court before which the party
seeking the measures does not wish to litigate. The actual standard and procedural requirements to avoid a waiver of a right to
arbitrate are a matter for national law. However, it should be remembered that art.II(3) of the New York Convention requires a
party to apply to dismiss the national court proceedings and to thus compel arbitration if national proceedings are brought.
Footnotes
534
Supreme Court of Philippines, 19 May 2006, Transfield Philippines Inc v Luzon Hydro Corp, Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd and Security Bank Corp (ICC Case No.11264 with Singapore as place of arbitration): “As
a fundamental point, the pendency of arbitral proceedings does not foreclose resort to the courts for provisional relief.
The Rules of the ICC, which govern the parties’ arbitral dispute, allow the application of a party to a judicial authority
for interim or conservatory measures. Likewise, s.14 of the Republic Act No.876 recognises the rights of any party
to petition the court to take measures to safeguard and/or conserve any matter which is the subject of the dispute in
arbitration”; http://sc.judiciary.gov.ph/ [accessed 29 October 2021].
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
