Article 24(4): Conduct of case management conferences, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406936...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 24(4): Conduct of case management conferences
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Case Management Issues
Article 24(4): Conduct of case management conferences
“Case management conferences may be conducted through a meeting in person, by video conference, telephone or similar
means of communication. In the absence of an agreement of the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall determine the means by
which the conference will be conducted. The arbitral tribunal may request the parties to submit case management proposals
in advance of a case management conference and may request the attendance at any case management conference of the
parties in person or through an internal representative.”
24-29
To be cost effective, it is advisable to hold a case management conference by telephone or video conference, unless all
participants are based in the same city, or if particular procedural requests are to be pleaded, such as requests for interim measures
for instance. The second sentence of art.24(4) provides the Tribunal with the right to determine the method of holding the
conference, absent an agreement of the parties.
24-30
Tribunals can and usually do request that parties comment on the proposed organisation of the case management conference
prior to it being held. The comments are intended to cover all matters to be dealt with at the case management conference
including comments on the draft Terms of Reference, on the procedural issues to be adopted pursuant to art.22(2), the procedural
timetable and, in some cases, whether the parties wish to consider the case management techniques in App.IV. The priority for
many arbitrators is to encourage the parties not only to comment, but also to confer with or among each other with a view to
arriving at joint proposals for the procedure.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
