Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 7 - Role of National Courts During the Proceedings
Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings
7. 18
What happens in the most important phase of an arbitration, when the arbitrators begin their task? The baton has been passed to
them. Is there any need for national courts to be involved in the arbitral process? The answer in almost every case is ‘no’, and
the recent changes to major arbitration rules which provide for Emergency Arbitrators or the expedited formation of arbitral
tribunals have made that ‘no’ more emphatic. 26  Once an arbitral tribunal has been constituted, most arbitrations are conducted
without any need to refer to a national court, even if one of the parties fails or refuses to take part in the proceedings. There
may be times, however, when the involvement of a national court is necessary in order to ensure the proper conduct of the
arbitration. It may become necessary, for instance, to ask the competent court to assist in taking evidence or to make an order
for the preservation of property that is the subject of the dispute or to enforce tribunal-ordered interim measures. The question
that then arises is whether a national court may (or indeed should) become involved in a dispute that is subject to arbitration,
and if so, how far this involvement should extend.
(a) Interim measures—powers of the arbitral tribunal
7. 19
As discussed in Chapter 5, it may become necessary during the course of an arbitration for the arbitral tribunal or a national
court to issue orders intended to preserve evidence, to protect assets, or in some other way to maintain the status quo pending the
outcome of the arbitration. The purpose of interim measures has been described by the EU’s former Advocate General Tesauro
as being ‘to achieve that fundamental objective of every legal system, the effectiveness of judicial protection’, by ensuring
‘that the time needed to establish the existence of the right does not in the end have the effect of irremediably depriving the
right of substance’. 27
7. 20
Such measures of protection take different forms and go under different names. In the Model Law 28  and in the UNCITRAL
Rules, 29  they are known as ‘interim measures’. In the English version of the ICC Rules, they are known as ‘interim or
conservatory measures and in the French version, as ‘mesures conservatoires ou provisoires’. 30  In the Swiss law governing
international arbitration, they are referred to as ‘provisional or conservatory measures’. 31  Whatever their designation, however,
they are intended in principle to operate as holding orders and to apply only pending the issue of the final arbitral award.
7. 21
In many cases in which interim measures of protection are required, the arbitral tribunal itself has the power to issue them,
as considered in Chapter 5. There are, however, five situations in which a party seeking interim relief will need to refer to a
national court.
(i) No powers
7. 22

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
First, the arbitral tribunal may not have the necessary powers. This is usually a result of antique domestic legislation, going
back to a time when, for reasons of public policy, the power to grant such measures was considered to be a prerogative of the
national courts. Such limitations are today very rarely encountered in practice. 32
(ii) Inability to act prior to the formation of the tribunal
7. 23
Second, it is evident that an arbitral tribunal cannot issue interim measures until it has been established. 33  The point may
seem obvious, yet it is frequently overlooked until a crisis arises. The problem is that it takes time to establish an arbitral
tribunal and, during that time, vital evidence or assets may disappear.
7. 24
Most international institutional rules have sought to address this problem through rules allowing for the appointment of
so-called Emergency Arbitrators. 34  The idea is that so-called ‘Emergency Arbitrators’ may be appointed at short notice
by the institution to resolve problems (such as the threatened transfer of assets by the respondent) that may arise prior
to the constitution of the formal tribunal. Once appointed, the Emergency Arbitrators will do their job and then take no
further part in the proceedings. However, in circumstances of great urgency, it may happen that, even if there is provision
for the appointment of Emergency Arbitrators, they would not be appointed quickly enough, so that the applicant would
be obliged to resort to the national courts to obtain interim measures within the required timeframe. 35  For example, the
LCIA Rules permit the Emergency Arbitrator a maximum of fourteen days from the date of appointment to determine the
application, 36  while the ICC Rules permit a maximum of fifteen days from the date on which the file was transmitted to
the Emergency Arbitrator. 37  Certain courts may determine applications for interim measures even more quickly than the
‘Emergency Arbitrator’ mechanism allows. This is often because courts are ready to hear applications on an ex parte basis,
which (as addressed below) Emergency Arbitrators are generally prohibited from doing.
(iii) An order can affect only the parties to the arbitration
7. 25
The third factor that may make the assistance of a national court necessary is that the powers of an arbitral tribunal are
generally limited to the parties to the arbitration. The Model Law makes it plain that an arbitral tribunal may order interim
measures only against ‘a party’. 38  A third-party order, for example, addressed to a bank holding deposits of a party would
not be enforceable against the bank, and multiparty or multi-contract disputes may also pose similar problems, requiring
national court assistance.
(iv) Enforcement difficulties
7. 26
Fourth, as discussed below, 39  enforcement of interim measures ordered by an arbitral tribunal is not always straightforward,
because it is uncertain where such orders may rank under the enforcement regime of the New York Convention. That regime
applies only to ‘awards’, 40  for which finality is considered an essential characteristic in many jurisdictions, and the New York
Convention is silent as to whether it applies to interim awards by an arbitral tribunal. Consequently, in circumstances where
there may be a need for international enforcement of an interim measure in a jurisdiction that lacks an available mechanism
for such enforcement, 41  parties should consider the possibility of applying for such measures before the courts of the place
of execution.

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
(v) No ex parte application
7. 27
Fifth, a party may need to make an application ex parte (that is, without notice to the party against whom the measure
is directed) for example, to freeze the opposing party’s bank account in order to prevent the transfer of funds abroad.
As discussed in Chapter 5, the revised Model Law offers the possibility of limited ex parte applications to the arbitral
tribunal. 42  However, ‘preliminary orders’ for interim measures obtained from tribunals through ex parte applications are
not enforceable, 43  which considerably reduces their effectiveness, and the rules of the leading institutions do not currently
expressly envisage giving such powers to arbitrators. As a consequence, in most cases in which ex parte relief is important,
such as where there is a risk of dissipation of assets or of important evidence being destroyed, the only option is to apply
to the competent court.
(b) Interim measures—powers of the competent court
7. 28
For these reasons, it is important that the competent court should have the power to issue interim measures in support of the
arbitral process. In situations of extreme urgency, in which third parties need to be involved or in which there is a strong
possibility that a party will not voluntarily execute the tribunal’s order, there may be little option but to identify the appropriate
state court and to make the application to that court. The measures requested may include the granting of an injunction to
preserve the status quo or to prevent the disappearance of assets; or the issue of an order to assist in the taking of evidence from
witnesses or to ensure the preservation of property or evidence.
7. 29
An application to a court for interim measures may give rise to at least two problems. First, if a party to an arbitration agreement
makes an application for interim measures to the court rather than to the arbitral tribunal, will this be regarded as a breach of
the agreement to arbitrate? Second, if the choice between seeking interim measures from the courts or from the arbitral tribunal
is truly an open choice, should the application be made to the courts or to the arbitral tribunal?
(i) Incompatibility with the arbitration agreement?
7. 30
The risk that resort to interim measures before a court might operate as a waiver of the arbitration agreement, or that any
order so obtained might be dissolved in the face of a valid arbitration clause, appears now to be negligible. Most arbitration
rules are explicit in confirming that an application for interim relief from a court is not incompatible with an arbitration
agreement. 44  For example, Article 9 of the Model Law states categorically that: ‘It is not incompatible with an arbitration
agreement for a party to request, before or during arbitral proceedings, from a court an interim measure of protection and
for a court to grant such measure.’
(ii) Should an application be made to a national court or to the arbitrators?
7. 31
On the question of whether to seek interim relief from the relevant court or the arbitral tribunal, much depends on the relevant
law, the applicable institutional rules, and the nature of the relief sought. The relevant law may make it clear, for instance,
that any application should be made first to the arbitral tribunal, and only then to the court of the seat of arbitration. This is
the position taken by Swiss law, which empowers the arbitral tribunal to take ‘provisional’, or conservatory, measures (unless

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
the parties otherwise agree), then states that if the party against whom the order is made fails to comply, the arbitral tribunal
may request assistance from the competent court. 45
7. 32
English law is equally careful to spell out the position. It does so in three provisos to the court’s ‘powers exercisable in
support of arbitral proceedings’, including the preservation of evidence, the inspection of property, the granting of an interim
injunction, and the appointment of a receiver. These three provisos are set out at section 44(3)-(5) of the English Arbitration
Act 1996:
Section 44
(3) If the case is one of urgency, the court may, on the application of a party or proposed party to the arbitral
proceedings, make such order as it thinks necessary for the purpose of preserving evidence or assets.
(4) If the case is not one of urgency, the court shall act only on the application of a party to the arbitral
proceedings [ … ] made with the permission of the tribunal or with the agreement in writing of the other
parties.
(5) In any case the court shall act only if or to the extent that the arbitral tribunal [ … ] has no power or
is unable for the time being to act effectively.
7. 33
Similarly, various institutional rules set additional hurdles which must be cleared before an application to court for interim
measures is permissible. For example, such applications may only be made pursuant to Article 25.3 of the LCIA Rules,
‘after the formation of the Arbitral Tribunal, in exceptional cases and with the tribunal’s authorisation’. Similarly, pursuant
to Rule 30.3 of the SIAC Rules, a court application for interim relief can only be made ‘in exceptional circumstances’ after
the tribunal’s constitution. The ICC Rules are somewhat more permissive, providing at Article 28.1 that court applications
may be made ‘in appropriate circumstances’ after the case file has been transmitted to the arbitral tribunal.
7. 34
Where the position is not spelled out clearly by the national law or by institutional rules, the answer to the question of whether
to seek interim relief from the court or from the arbitral tribunal is likely to depend upon the particular circumstances of each
case. If, for example, the tribunal has not been constituted, the matter is one of urgency, and there is a concern that an order
by an emergency arbitrator may not be voluntarily executed, the only possibility is to apply to the relevant national court for
interim measures. At the same time, the party seeking such an order should take steps to advance the arbitration, so as to
show that there is every intention of respecting the agreement to arbitrate. 46  Where the arbitral tribunal is in existence, or
where the appointment of an emergency arbitrator is possible and likely to be effective, it would be appropriate to apply first
to that tribunal or emergency arbitrator unless international enforcement may be required.
7. 35
This is not simply a question of division of labour. Although an arbitral tribunal or an emergency arbitrator lacks the coercive
powers of a court of law, and although there are questions concerning the international enforceability of an order for interim
measures, parties should not forget that any order is binding as between the parties themselves. It is a brave (or foolish) party
who deliberately chooses to ignore interim measures ordered by the tribunal that is charged with deciding the merits of its
dispute. As one experienced commentator has asserted:
Ultimately, of course, the arbitrators’ greatest source of coercive power lies in their position as arbiters of the
merits of the dispute between the parties. Parties seeking to appear before arbitrators as good citizens who have
been wronged by their adversary would generally not wish to defy instructions given to them by those whom
they wished to convince of the justice of their claims. 47
7. 36

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
There are other logistical problems inherent in applying to a court for interim measures. 48  Often, the merits of the dispute
will fall to be determined under a foreign law, which the local court would be ill-prepared to consider at an interim stage.
In addition, the language of the dispute and the contract may be different from that of the foreign court. Finally, the chosen
court is likely to be at the place of execution of the order to avoid concerns as to enforceability. This may give rise to a
difficulty in persuading the court that the measures are necessary, if they are being sought against a state or local entity, in
favour of a foreign corporation. 49
7. 37
The nature of the relief sought is also likely to have an important bearing on the question of whether to go to a national
court or to the arbitral tribunal. Interim measures of relief take many forms and differ from state to state. In addition, new
and important forms of relief may be crafted by the courts or set out in legislation, so that it would be unwise to regard the
categories of interim measures as being in any sense closed. 50  The following classification may, however, be helpful:
 
•measures relating to the attendance of witnesses;
 
•measures related to preservation of evidence;
 
•measures related to documentary disclosure;
 
•measures aimed at preserving the status quo; and
 
•measures aimed at relief in respect of parallel proceedings.
(c) Measures relating to the attendance of witnesses
7. 38
The first category of interim measures, directed towards the taking of witness evidence, is one of obvious concern. Since an
arbitral tribunal does not generally possess the power to compel the attendance of relevant witnesses, it may be necessary
to resort to the courts, particularly if the witness whose presence is required is not in any employment or other dependent
relationship to the parties to the arbitration and so cannot be persuaded to attend voluntarily. This need for the assistance of the
court is recognised by Article 27 of the Model Law:
The arbitral tribunal or a party with the approval of the arbitral tribunal may request from a competent court of
this State assistance in taking evidence. The court may execute the request within its competence and according
to its rules on taking evidence.
7. 39
Some national arbitration laws, including those of countries such as Switzerland, which have not adopted the Model Law as
it stands, nevertheless follow this form of wording very closely. 51  In other arbitration laws, the position may be set out more
fully. For example, section 43 of the English Arbitration Act 1996 provides that:
Section 43
(1) A party to arbitral proceedings may use the same court procedures as are available in relation to legal
proceedings to secure the attendance before the tribunal of a witness in order to give oral testimony or to
produce documents or other material evidence.
(2) This may only be done with the permission of the tribunal or the agreement of the other parties.
(3) The court procedures may only be used if—
(a) the witness is in the United Kingdom, and

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
(b) the arbitral proceedings are being conducted in England and Wales or, as the case may be, Northern
Ireland.
(4) A person shall not be compelled by virtue of this section to produce any document or other material
evidence which he could not be compelled to produce in legal proceedings.
7. 40
In an arbitration seated in the United States, section 7 FAA grants arbitrators the power to subpoena witnesses within the
jurisdiction either to appear to give oral evidence or to disclose relevant documentary evidence in their possession. 53
7. 41
Practically, a subpoena can be issued by tribunals only in respect of witnesses present in the jurisdiction, and there appear to
be few instances of the power having been exercised in the context of international arbitrations. 54  In one unreported ICC case,
a tribunal refused to exercise its power to issue a subpoena to produce documents against a foreign national present in New
York only for the arbitration hearing. The tribunal considered that the parties would not have contemplated the exercise of such
power when selecting New York as a seat for a dispute that otherwise had no connection with the United States.
7. 42
The ‘any person’ wording of section 7 of the FAA expressly authorises tribunals to subpoena parties and non-parties to the
arbitration agreement to attend hearings. However, there is conflicting authority at the Circuit level regarding whether this
power extends to ordering pre-hearing discovery from non-parties (for example, in the form of interrogatories and depositions).
The Sixth and Eighth Circuits have held that section 7 applies to pre-hearing discovery of documents in the possession of third
parties, 55  while the Fourth Circuit permits pre-hearing discovery of non-parties where a party demonstrates a ‘special need or
hardship’, such as where the information sought is otherwise unavailable. 56  Conversely, the Second, Third, Ninth, and Eleventh
Circuits have all taken the opposite stance. 57  The Second Circuit has distinguished between depositions of non-parties and
testimony of non-parties at preliminary hearings, finding only the latter permissible under section 7. 58  The key difference is
that preliminary hearings are conducted before the arbitrators, unlike depositions.
(d) Measures related to the preservation of evidence
7. 43
As far as the preservation of evidence is concerned, it is obviously important that evidence should not be destroyed before a
proper record can be made of it. 59  If, for example, the dispute is over the quality of a consignment of coffee or cocoa beans,
then some assessment of that quality must be made before the consignment is either sold or perishes. Or again for example, if
the dispute is over the number or quality of reinforcing bars used in the concrete foundations of a road, bridge, or dam, some
record must be preserved, preferably by independent experts, before those foundations are covered over. Moreover, given that
the preservation of evidence is a matter of particular concern right at the beginning of the case, and probably well before the
formation of the arbitral tribunal, this is an area in which parties are likely to rely heavily either on assistance from the competent
national court or from an Emergency Arbitrator.
7. 44
Arbitration laws may grant specific powers to national courts to support arbitration by means of the granting of interim
injunctions to preserve evidence. For example, section 44 of the English Arbitration Act 1996 grants to the courts in cases of
urgency the same powers in arbitration to order the preservation of evidence, or the inspection, photographing, or preservation
of property, as in court proceedings. 60  In one case, pending initiation of an arbitration, the Court of Appeal granted a freezing
order preventing a respondent from disposing or otherwise dealing with shares in order to protect a disputed right to purchase
under a share purchase agreement. 61  The Court considered that property could include contractual rights and that there was

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
no bar to the issuing of a mandatory injunction. The key issue was the need to protect the rights that would be the subject of
the arbitration.
(e) Measures related to documentary disclosure
7. 45
As observed in Chapter 6, the arbitral tribunal’s power to order disclosure of documents is generally limited to the parties to
the arbitration. Yet, in certain circumstances, relevant documents may be in the hands of a third party. Whilst the courts of the
seat of the arbitration may offer some assistance, 62  that seat has usually been chosen for its neutrality, and so the relevant third
party is unlikely to be within its jurisdiction. The usual result is that third-party documents remain outside the scope of the
arbitral process. Prior to the US Supreme Court’s June 2022 judgment in the joined cases of ZF Automotive US, Inc. v Luxshare,
Ltd. and AlixPartners LLP v Fund for Protection Investors’ Rights in Foreign States, there were states in the United States
where an application to obtain disclosure of documents in support of a foreign arbitration was possible. The importance of this
tool was magnified by, the expansiveness of US discovery processes, which could yield access to forms of disclosure (such as
depositions) from third parties that would not be normally available in an international arbitration from the parties themselves.
7. 46
It was argued that this contested power arose from section 1782(a) of Title 28 of the US Code, which permits a district court
to order a person who ‘resides or is found’ in the district to give testimony or produce documents ‘for use in a foreign or
international tribunal [ … ] upon the application of any interested person’. In 2004, contrary to the prevailing view until then that
this power was limited to judicial courts and thus did not extend to arbitration proceedings, 63  the US Supreme Court remarked
obiter in Intel Corporation v Advanced Micro Devices, Inc that this power does in fact extend to foreign arbitral tribunals,
subject to the following four discretionary factors:
 
a)whether the material sought is accessible to the foreign tribunal absent section 1782;
 
b)the nature of the tribunal, the character of the proceedings, and the receptivity of the tribunal to US assistance;
 
c)whether the request conceals an attempt to circumvent foreign proof-gathering restrictions or other policies; and
 
d)whether the request is unduly intrusive or burdensome. 64
7. 47
Following Intel and prior to ZF Automotive, a consistent line of case law supported the view that section 1782 was applicable in
relation to investor–state arbitration. 65  Much of this jurisprudence flowed from the Chevron-Ecuador dispute, in which section
1782 was deployed repeatedly by both parties to the dispute. 66
7. 48
By contrast, no unanimous approach emerged in respect of the provision’s applicability to international commercial arbitration.
Instead, the ensuing inter-Circuit (and even intra-Circuit) splits caused this jurisprudence to take on what one author has
described as a ‘wheel-of-fortune like nature’. 67  The Fourth and Sixth Circuits, for instance, took the position that it was
applicable, 68  whilst other circuits, including the Second, Fifth, and Seventh, adopted either contrary or inconsistent views. 69
7. 49
This legal uncertainty was clearly unsatisfactory, particularly in light of the increasing use of section 1782 applications by
parties to foreign-seated international arbitrations. The US Supreme Court’s intervention now resolves (at least much of)
that uncertainty. In its unanimous judgment, the Court held that section 1782 required a ‘foreign or international tribunal’
to be ‘governmental or intergovernmental’ to fall within its scope, rather than also encompassing ‘[p]rivate adjudicatory
bodies’. 70  It based this determination on a contextual and purposive interpretation of the statute. 71  The Court found it to be a
‘straightforward’ matter that the commercial arbitral tribunal in question in the former of the joined appeals could not qualify
as governmental. 72  And although the Court considered that the investment tribunal at issue in the latter of the appeals (an
ad hoc UNCITRAL tribunal constituted pursuant to a bilateral investment treaty) posed ‘a harder question’, it nevertheless

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
again rejected the argument that this tribunal qualified as governmental. 73  In both determinations, the Court dispensed with
any recourse to the discretionary factors previously considered in Intel. It did, however, reserve judgment on ‘the possibility
that sovereigns might imbue an ad hoc arbitration panel with official authority’. 74  The Court thereby preserved some room for
continued jurisprudential and scholarly debate as to whether other investment tribunals—notably, those constituted pursuant to
the ICSID Convention, or under the auspices of an often mooted multilateral investment court—might be deemed to qualify as
governmental, and therefore fall within section 1782’s scope. However, that room appears to be limited.
7. 50
Therefore, section 1782’s application to international arbitration appears now in large part to have run its course.
(f) Measures aimed at preserving the status quo
7. 51
There are many cases in which an award of damages, however substantial, does not adequately compensate the injured party
for the loss that it has suffered. This may include damage to reputation, loss of business opportunities, and similar heads of
claim, which are real enough, but difficult to prove and to quantify, even if they are considered to be legally admissible. For
example, a manufacturer may refuse to continue supplies under a distribution agreement, alleging breach of contract. If the
distributor does not receive the supplies for which it has contracted, it may not be able to fulfil the contracts that it, in turn, has
made. This may damage the distributor’s reputation. In such a case, the distributor would no doubt wish to argue that the status
quo should be maintained and that the manufacturer should continue to supply, pending resolution of the dispute by arbitration.
Similarly, a pharmaceutical company may produce a particular drug under licence, then decide to manufacture and market a
competing product under its own name, claiming that there is nothing in the licence agreement to prevent it doing so. In such
a case, the licensor probably wishes to argue that, until the dispute is resolved by arbitration, the licensee should be restrained
from manufacturing and marketing the competing product.
7. 52
A key consideration which governs applications for this category of interim measures is not only whether they should be made
to a national court or to an arbitral tribunal, but also whether ordering such interim relief ‘would be equivalent to pre-judging
the merits of the case’. 75  An application is likely to fail if it is found that granting the interim measures sought would have
this effect. This consideration confronted the English courts in the Channel Tunnel case. This was a case that went on appeal
from the court of first instance to the Court of Appeal and then to the (then) highest English court, the House of Lords. Each
court gave a different answer to the two questions posed.
7. 53
The contract for the construction of the Channel Tunnel was between Eurotunnel (the owner and intended operator of the tunnel)
and Trans-Manche Link (TML), a consortium of five French and five British construction companies that had agreed to construct
the land terminals, bore and equip the tunnels, and provide the necessary rolling stock. One serious dispute that arose between
the parties was about payment for the Tunnel’s cooling system. This was not part of the original specification, but was added by
a variation order. TML claimed that the monthly payments it received for the cooling system were insufficient. By the end of
September 1991, the gap between what Eurotunnel had paid and what TML claimed had grown to approximately £17 million.
In October 1991, TML wrote to Eurotunnel, threatening to suspend work on the cooling system unless its claim was met in full
and pointing out the ‘very serious’ consequences that this would have for completion of the project, with subcontractors and
other workers having to be laid off, equipment orders being delayed or cancelled, and so forth. In reply, Eurotunnel applied to
the English court for an interim injunction to restrain TML from carrying out its threat. TML argued that the English courts had
no power to intervene by granting the injunction that was sought; instead, it said, the court should stay the litigation and refer
the parties to arbitration, in accordance with the then governing statute. 76
7. 54
The judge who heard the case at first instance decided that he did have the power to grant an injunction and would have done so,
but for an undertaking by TML to continue working pending further court proceedings. 77  The Court of Appeal considered that
it was an appropriate case for an injunction, but that it had no power to grant one, because of the arbitration agreement. 78  The

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
House of Lords considered that it did have power to grant an injunction, but thought it inappropriate to do so. In giving the House
of Lords’ judgment, Lord Mustill highlighted the problem to which this kind of application for interim relief may give rise:
It is true that mandatory interlocutory relief may be granted even where it substantially over-laps the final relief
claimed in the action; and I also accept that it is possible for the court at the pre-trial stage of the dispute arising
under a construction contract to order the defendant to continue with a performance of the works. But the court
should approach the making of such an order with the utmost caution and should be prepared to act only when
the balance of advantage plainly favours the grant of relief. In the combination of circumstances which we find
in the present case, I would have hesitated long before proposing that such an order should be made, even if the
action had been destined to remain in the High Court. 79
7. 55
That in the Channel Tunnel case, three different courts gave different answers to the questions of whether or not there was power
to issue an injunction, and if so, whether it would be appropriate to do so, underlines the difficulties posed by such questions. 80
It is no comfort to the practitioner to say so, but there is no clear rule as to whether or not an injunction will be issued in particular
circumstances. 81  Each case has to be assessed individually.
(g) Interim relief in respect of parallel proceedings
7. 56
Whilst an uneasy truce may have been signed between the courts and arbitral tribunals in developed arbitral jurisdictions, 82
a ‘turf war’ continues in other parts of the world, where there is an uncomfortable trend towards the issue of ‘anti-arbitration’
injunctions, either by the courts of the seat or by the courts of the place of eventual enforcement. The fact pattern is often
similar: a dispute arises between a foreign party and a state, or state-owned entity, which has signed an arbitration agreement.
The state entity wishes to sabotage the arbitral proceedings and to have the case remitted for judicial determination in its own
courts. It therefore seeks an injunction before those courts, seeking to challenge the jurisdiction of the tribunal, and an order
requiring the arbitrators and adverse party to suspend or abandon the arbitral proceedings on pain of daily fines (or worse).
This problem has raised serious challenges for the modern arbitrator: should such orders be obeyed, even where they are the
product of improper intervention at the local or state level, or should the arbitrator seek to ensure justice in the individual case,
often at risk of monetary penalties (or worse)?
7. 57
In one such case, a subsidiary of a US corporation, Himpurna, had entered into a contract with the Indonesian state electricity
corporation, PLN, to explore and develop geothermal resources in Indonesia and subsequently to sell the power to PLN. In the
wake of the Asian economic crisis, PLN failed to purchase the electricity supplied. Himpurna relied on the arbitration clause
in the contract to commence an arbitration under the UNCITRAL Rules against PLN. A final award was made in favour of
Himpurna, which PLN refused to pay. Himpurna subsequently commenced a second arbitration proceeding against Indonesia,
based on Indonesia’s pledge to secure PLN’s performance. Shortly after serving the statement of claim, proceedings were
commenced by both PLN and Indonesia in the Indonesian courts, which resulted in interim injunctions ordering the suspension
of the arbitral proceedings pending a court decision on the merits, with an attached fine of US$1 million per day for breach
of the order.
7. 58
The tribunal considered that the injunction was a transparent attempt to avoid the consequences of a freely signed arbitration
agreement and refused to abandon the arbitration. To avoid the risk of breaching the Indonesian court order, the tribunal moved
the place of the hearing to The Hague and convened witnesses. Indonesia tried to stop such hearings from proceeding by seeking
an injunction from the Dutch courts. This attempt failed, and the hearings were held (albeit in truncated form without the
presence of the Indonesian arbitrator) and a final award issued.
7. 59
The colourful facts of this case raise important questions as to how an arbitral tribunal can seek to avoid injunctions of
national courts in extreme circumstances. First, hearings in an UNCITRAL case can be held ‘at any place [the tribunal] deems

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
appropriate’, and so the physical transfer of the hearings to The Hague was permitted by the Rules. In connection with the
injunction itself, Article 28 of the UNCITRAL Rules allows a tribunal to proceed with the arbitration notwithstanding one
party’s default whenever the defaulting party has failed to show ‘sufficient cause’ for its default. In this regard, the arbitral
tribunal found that the Indonesian injunction did not constitute ‘sufficient cause’, because (a) it was sought and obtained by a
state agency that was under the de jure control of the government of Indonesia, and (b) the government of Indonesia had de facto
made no attempt to rein in those actions that were inconsistent with its obligations under the parties’ arbitration agreement.
7. 60
As a second ground, the arbitral tribunal held that the very existence of an arbitration agreement, and the involvement of a state
party, entitled the tribunal to apply international law. As a matter of international law, the actions of the Indonesian courts were
attributable to the Republic of Indonesia. In Benteler v Belgium, 83  an international tribunal had held that ‘a state which has
signed an arbitration clause or agreement would be acting contrary to international public policy if it subsequently relied on
the incompatibility of such an obligation with its internal legal system’. 84  The arbitral tribunal held that it would constitute ‘a
denial of justice for the courts of a State to prevent a foreign party from pursuing its remedies before a forum to the authority of
which the State consented’. 85  Thirdly, the tribunal held that an international arbitral tribunal is not ‘unconditionally subject’ to
the jurisdiction of the courts at the seat of the arbitration. Specifically, the ‘adjudicatory authority’ of an international tribunal
‘does not emanate from a discrete sovereign but rather from an international order’. 86
7. 61
There are also examples of national courts with no supervisory jurisdiction that have sought to stay foreign arbitral proceedings.
In National Grid v Argentina, 87  the claimant had instituted proceedings under the UNCITRAL Rules against Argentina,
pursuant to the United Kingdom–Argentina BIT. The parties agreed to a juridical seat of Washington, DC, and the ICC was
designated as appointing authority. In the course of proceedings, Argentina unsuccessfully challenged the president of the
tribunal before the ICC and then brought a claim against the ICC before its own courts in Buenos Aires. Less than a week before
the final hearing, Argentina obtained an interim injunction in its domestic proceedings against the ICC to stay the arbitration
in Washington, DC. The tribunal refused to suspend the proceedings, noting that the procedure for the challenge of arbitrators
was a self-contained procedure under the UNCITRAL Rules, agreed by the parties, and further that the supervisory courts were
those of the agreed seat, being Washington, DC, and not Argentina. Similarly, in SGS v Pakistan, 88  the Pakistan Supreme Court
issued an order against SGS restraining it from taking any action to pursue arbitration proceedings that it had commenced under
the Arbitration Rules of the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) on the basis of a BIT. SGS
nevertheless pursued its case, considering that the Pakistani courts had no supervisory jurisdiction over an ICSID claim.
7. 62
Such cases nevertheless remain rare. The vast majority of arbitrations are pursued without interference from domestic courts.
Nevertheless, the evolution of an international law principle by which tribunals must abide, even if in conflict with the dictates
of the courts of the seat, may cause such courts to curtail their partisan zeal and conform to accepted international norms.
(h) Court enforcement of tribunal-ordered interim measures
7. 63
As discussed above, 89  when a party is subject to interim measures ordered by an arbitral tribunal, it has a powerful incentive
to comply with the order voluntarily to avoid prejudicing its standing in the eyes of the tribunal that will adjudicate upon the
merits of its dispute. However, in the absence of such voluntary compliance, an arbitral tribunal lacks the authority directly to
enforce its orders of interim measures (just as tribunals also lack the authority to directly enforce their own final awards). In
such circumstances, it is therefore necessary for the applicant party to apply to the national courts to compel compliance.
7. 64
As already mentioned, there have been difficulties in enforcing arbitral interim measures internationally as a consequence of
the uncertainty that remains as to whether they come within the enforcement regime of the New York Convention. 90  The
Convention is silent on this point, 91  a by-product of its adoption in 1958, a time when arbitral interim measures were far rarer

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
than they are today. The ongoing debate has centred upon whether such interim measures possess the necessary characteristic
of finality to qualify as ‘awards’ enforceable under the Convention, a question on which commentators have expressed varied
positions. 92
7. 65
To address this uncertainty, the Model Law and numerous other national arbitration statutes provide for a sui generis enforcement
mechanism for arbitral interim measures. Pursuant to Article 17 H(1), the Model Law’s regime applies irrespective of the seat of
the tribunal that ordered the interim measures in question, and regardless of whether the interim measure is styled as an award,
an order, or a decision. Interim measures are required to be enforced subject to certain limited grounds for non-enforcement
set forth in Article 17 I, which includes the standard grounds for non-enforcement of awards on the merits under Article 36
and further grounds relevant specifically to interim measures, for example a party having not fulfilled a tribunal’s order to post
security for the interim measure.
7. 66
An enforcement mechanism for arbitral interim measures is also enshrined, for instance, in English law, although it does not
apply to interim measures ordered by foreign-seated arbitral tribunals. 93  English law provides a two-stage process. First, under
section 41(5) of the English Arbitration Act 1996, a tribunal may grant a peremptory order against a party that is in default of
any order or directions (including interim measures); secondly, the peremptory order may be enforced by the courts pursuant
to section 42(1) of the 1996 Act. Pearl Petroleum & Others v The Kurdistan Regional Government provides a high-profile
example of this process in action, in which the English High Court enforced a US$100 million peremptory order issued in an
LCIA arbitration against the respondent state, after confirming that the court has discretion to review the order and was not
obliged to ‘act as a rubber stamp on orders made by the tribunal’. 94
7. 67
A further approach to enforcement that some states have taken is to label certain interim measures ordered by tribunals as
‘awards’, at least as far as their own legislation is concerned. This is the case in Israel and Malaysia, which define ‘award’
to include an interim award, 95  and New Zealand, 96  which makes the provisions on enforcement of awards applicable to an
interim measures order (unless the tribunal provides otherwise). Institutional rules typically leave the form in which arbitral
interim measures are granted at the discretion of the tribunal. 97  In the context of an ICC arbitration, granting such measures in
the form of an order rather than an award may add considerably to the speed of the process, because an order, unlike an award,
will not need to be scrutinised by the ICC Court before issuance. 98
Footnotes
26
For data on the relative (in) frequency of different types of national court involvement in arbitration cases, see Korzun
and Lee, ‘An empirical survey of international commercial arbitration cases in the US District Court for the Southern
District of New York, 1970–2014’ (2016) 39(2) Fordham Intl Law J 307.
27
Opinion of Advocate General Tesauro, R. v Secretary of State for Transport, ex parte Factortame Ltd, Case No. 2-13/89,
[1990] ECR I-02433, at [18] (ECJ).
28
Model Law, Art. 17.
29
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 26.
30
ICC Rules, Art. 28.
31
Swiss PIL, art. 183.
32
Argentina was one of the last jurisdictions to remove this restriction, codified in Art. 753 of the Argentine Code of
Civil Procedure, which states: ‘Arbitrators may not issue binding measures, but shall request them from the judge, who
shall provide its jurisdictional assistance for the fastest and most effective conduct of the arbitration proceedings.’ This
provision, though still technically in force, is overridden in respect of international arbitration by Law No. 27,449 on
International Commercial Arbitration (2018), which incorporates the Model Law’s interim measures regime, and in
respect of domestic arbitration by Art. 1655 of the National Joint Civil and Commercial Code (2015).

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
33
Indeed, in the case of ICC arbitrations, interim measures cannot be issued by the tribunal until the file has been
transmitted to it: see ICC Rules, Art. 28.
34
SCC Rules, Art. 37.4 and Appendix II; ICC Rules, Art. 29.1 and Appendix V; SIAC Rules, Art. 30.2 and Sch. 1; HKIAC
Rules, Art. 23.1 and Sch. 4, Art. 1; ICDR Rules, Art. 6; LCIA Rules, Art. 9B; JAMS Rules, r. 2(c); AAA Rules, R-38;
NAI Rules, Art. 36.4.
35
See, e.g., Gerald Metals S.A v Timis & Ors [2016] EWHC 2327 (CH), at [53]: ‘It is common ground that there can
be situations where the need for relief, for example in the form of a freezing injunction, is so urgent that the power to
appoint an emergency arbitrator is insufficient and the court may properly act under section 44 of the Arbitration Act—
for example if the application is one that needs to be made without notice.’
36
LCIA Rules, Art. 9.8.
37
ICC Rules, Appendix V, Art. 6.4.
38
Model Law, Art. 17(2).
39
Paragraphs 7.63ff.
40
Pursuant to Art. III of the New York Convention.
41
As examples of such jurisdictions, Castello and Chahine list the following: ‘although the Korean Arbitration Act was
revised in 2016 and largely incorporated provisions on interim measures from the 2006 Model Law, it nevertheless
limits enforcement of interim measures to those issued by tribunals seated in Korea. In 2010, the Chilean Supreme Court
rejected the exequatur of arbitral interim measures granted abroad regarding assets located in Chile. Similarly, in Russia,
the Presidium of the Highest Arbitrazh Court reaffirmed in 2010 its position that only awards finally deciding (part
of) the merits of a dispute can be enforced in the Russian Federation’: Castello and Chahine, ‘Enforcement of interim
measures’, in Rowley KC, Gaillard, and Kaiser (eds) The Guide to Challenging and Enforcing Arbitration Awards
(Global Arbitration Review, 2019), p. 111.
42
Model Law, Art. 17B(1): ‘Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party may, without notice to any other party, make
a request for an interim measure together with an application for a preliminary order directing a party not to frustrate
the purpose of the interim measure requested.’ Jurisdictions that have adopted legislation based on the revised Model
Law allowing for ex parte preliminary orders include Australia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Hong Kong, Ireland, Lithuania,
Panama, Peru, and Rwanda.
43
Model Law, Art. 17 C(5).
44
For example, ICC Rules, Art. 28.2; UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 26.9; ICDR Rules, Art. 24.3; SCC Rules, Art. 37.5; ICC
Rules, Art. 28.2; SIAC Rules, Art. 30.3; HKIAC Rules, Art. 23.9; LCIA Rules, Art. 25.3; Swiss Rules, Art. 26.5; JAMS
Rules, r. 24(e); AAA Rules, R-37.c.
45
Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, s. 183(1) and (2). In France, in a 2012 decision, the Reims cour d’appel held that, after the tribunal has
been constituted, applications for provisional or conservatory measures or measures relating to the taking of evidence
can no longer be made to domestic courts: see SA Clinique de Champagne v Enrico Ambrosini, Reims cour d’appel,
1ere Ch. Civ., 3 July 2012, [2012] Rev Arb 681.
46
In circumstances where national courts effectively ‘step into the shoes’ of the as yet un-constituted arbitral tribunal
by granting interim measures, English law requires that the applicant undertake to have the tribunal formed as soon
as possible thereafter: Econet Wireless Ltd v Vee Networks and Ors [2006] EWHC 1568 (Comm), at [14]. Similarly,
Brazilian law requires a party seeking interim measures prior to the commencement of arbitration to undertake to initiate
proceedings within 30 days: São Paulo Court of Appeals, Interlocutory Appeal 614.006-4/4/00.
47
Schwartz, ‘The practices and experience of the ICC Court’, in ICC (ed.) Conservatory and Provisional Measures in
International Arbitration, ICC Publication No. 519 (ICC, 1993), p. 59. The Analytical Commentary to the Model Law
expressly stipulates that ‘if a party does not take the interim measure of protection as ordered by the arbitral tribunal,
such failure may be taken into account in the final decision, in particular in any assessment of damages’: UNCITRAL,
Analytical Commentary on Draft Text of a Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, Report of the Secretary-
General, 25 March 1985, Art. 18, para. 5, p. 43. However, Binder criticises this guidance on the basis that ‘it implies
that the tribunal could act in a prejudiced way towards the party which did not obey the tribunal’s orders’, suggesting
that such an approach ‘could cause a tribunal to be challenged due to misconduct’: Binder, International Commercial
Arbitration and Mediation in UNCITRAL Model Law Jurisdictions (4th edn, Kluwer Law International, 2019), p. 281.
48
See Voser, ‘Interim relief in international arbitration: the tendency towards a more business-oriented approach’ (2007)
1(2) Disp Res Intl 171, at 173.
49
In an ICC arbitration in which one of the authors was involved (ICC Case No. 11681), the parties had to consider whether
to apply to the tribunal or to the local courts of the respondent for an interim measure. Given that the applicable law
and language were foreign to the local court, and that the measure sought to stop an important commercial transaction
of an entity local to the court, a decision was taken to apply to the arbitral tribunal. The measure was awarded and the
respondent complied voluntarily.

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
50
This is confirmed by Art. 17J of the Model Law, pursuant to which the nature of interim measures that can be granted by
national courts in support of arbitration mirrors the types of interim measures each court may grant in relation to court
proceedings. English law also follows this approach: Arbitration Act 1996, s. 44(1).
51
Swiss PIL, s. 184(2).
53
The section reads: ‘The arbitrators selected either as prescribed in this title or otherwise, or a majority of them, may
summon in writing any person to attend before them or any of them as a witness and in a proper case to bring with him or
them any book, record, document, or paper which may be deemed material as evidence in the case. [ … ] Said summons
shall issue in the name of the arbitrator or arbitrators, or a majority of them, and shall be signed by the arbitrators, or
a majority of them, and shall be directed to the said person and shall be served in the same manner as subpoenas to
appear and testify before the court; if any person or persons so summoned to testify shall refuse or neglect to obey
said summons, upon petition the United States district court for the district in which such arbitrators, or a majority of
them are sitting may compel the attendance of such person or persons before said arbitrator or arbitrators, or punish said
person or persons for contempt in the same manner provided by law for securing the attendance of witnesses or their
punishment for neglect or refusal to attend in the courts of the United States.’
54
In the United States, r. 45(b)(2) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) originally provided that a subpoena
‘may be served at any place within the district of the court by which it is issued, or at any place without the district that
is within 100 miles of the place of the deposition, hearing, trial, production, or inspection specified in the subpoena’.
Finding that the FRCP was incorporated by FAA, s. 7, the Second Circuit concluded that arbitrators could not issue
subpoenas beyond the territorial limit in r. 45(b)(2). Dynegy Midstream Services v Trammochem, 451 F.3d 89, 96 (2d
Cir. 2006). On the other hand, the Eighth Circuit chose not to apply the territorial limit in r. 45(b)(2) to arbitral subpoenas
to produce documents, since ‘the burden of producing documents need not increase appreciably with an increase in
the distance those documents must travel’. In 2013, r. 45(b)(2) FRCP was amended to eliminate the territorial limit on
the service of subpoenas, permitting service ‘at any place within the United States’. Relying on this amendment, the
Eleventh Circuit held that nationwide service of arbitral summonses was appropriate. Managed Care Advisory Grp.,
LLC v CIGNA Healthcare, Inc., 939 F.3d 1145, 1157 (11th Cir. 2019).
55
Am. Fed. Of Television & Radio Artists, 164 F.3d 1004, 1009 (6th Cir. 1999); In re Sec. Life Ins. Co. of Am., 228 F.3d
865, 870-871 (8th Cir. 2000). Later decisions by district courts in the Eighth Circuit have limited the application of
this holding to document production, reasoning that ‘the production of documents is less onerous and imposes a lesser
burden than does a witness deposition’. SchlumbergerSema, Inc. v Xcel Energy, Inc., No. CIV. 02-4304PAMJSM, 2004
WL 67647, at *2 (D. Minn. 2004).
56
See COMSAT Corporation v NSF, 190 F.3d 269, 276 (4th Cir. 1999); Application of Deiulemar Compagnia Di
Navigazione S.p.A. v M/V Allegra, 198 F.3d 473, 479-481 (4th Cir. 1999). The same test has also been applied by New
York State courts. Imclone Systems, Inc. v Waksal, 22 A.D.3d 387, 388 (NY App Div 2005); Matter of Roche Molecular
Sys. Inc. (Gutry), 76 NYS.3d 752, 758 (NY Sup Ct 2018).
57
Life Receivables Tr. v Syndicate 102 at Lloyd’s of London, 549 F.3d 210, 216 (2d Cir. 2008); Hay Group, Inc. v E.B.S.
Acquisition Corp., 360 F.3d 404 (3d Cir. 2008); CVS Health Corporation v Vividus, LLC, 878 F.3d 703, 706 (9th Cir.
2017); Managed Care Advisory Grp. v CIGNA Healthcare, 939 F.3d 1145, 1161 (11th Cir. 2019).
58
Stolt-Nielsen Transp. Grp., Inc. v Celanese AG, 430 F.3d 567, 578 (2d Cir. 2005); Life Receivables Tr. v Syndicate 102
at Lloyd’s of London, 549 F.3d 210, 217-218 (2d Cir. 2008); Washington Nat’l Ins. Co. v OBEX Grp. LLC, 958 F.3d
126, 136 (2d Cir. 2020).
59
This is not least because counsel is likely to be bound under national rules of professional conduct to ensure document
retention or at least to prevent the destruction of evidence, whilst Guideline 12 of the IBA Guidelines on Party
Representation imposes a duty on counsel to inform clients about the necessity of document preservation.
60
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 44(3).
61
Cetelem SA v Roust Holdings Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 618.
62
See Dupeyon, ‘Shall national courts assist arbitral tribunals in gathering evidence?’ (2016) ICCA Mauritius, Section
III.2.a.
63
National Broadcasting Co., Inc. v Bear Stearns & Co., Inc., 165 F.3d 184 (2d Cir. 1999); Republic of Kazakhstan v
Biedermann International 168 F.3d 880 (5th Cir. 1999).
64
Intel Corporation v Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 542 US 241, 124 S.Ct. 2466, 159 L.Ed.2d 355 (2004).
65
See, e.g., In re Petition of the Republic of Turkey for an Order Directing Discovery From Hamit Çiçek Pursuant to 28
U.S.C. § 1782, 2020 WL 4035499, at *3 (DNJ 17 July 2020); Pakistan v Arnold & Porter Kaye Scholer LLP, 2019 WL
1559433, at *7 (DDC); Stute, ‘28 USC § 1782—looking for consensus’ (2019) 35 Arb Intl 331, at 336.
66
Strong, ‘Discovery under 28 U.S.C. §1782: Distinguishing international commercial arbitration and international
investment arbitration’ (2013) University of Missouri School of Law Scholarship Repository, p. 20 et seq.
67
Stute, ‘28 USC § 1782—looking for consensus’ (2019) 35 Arb Intl 331, at 342.

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
68
Servotronics, Inc. v Boeing Co., 2020 WL 1501954 (4th Cir. 2020); Abdul Latif Jameel Trans. Co. Ltd. v FedEx Corp.,
2019 WL 4509287 (6th Cir. Case No. 19-5315).
69
See, e.g., Servotronics Inc. v Rolls-Royce PLC, 975 F.3d 689 (7th Cir. 2020); In re Application and Petition of Hanwei
Guo for an Order to take Discovery for Use in a Foreign Proceeding Pursuant to 28 U.S.C., 1782, 965 F.3d 96 (2d
Cir. 2020); El Paso Corporation v La Comision Ejecutiva Hidroelectrica Del Rio Lempa, 341 Fed.Appx 31 (5th Cir.
2009); Kleimar N.V., US Dist Court, SD New York, Nov 16, 2016, 220 F.Supp. 3d 517 (SDNY 2016); In re Children’s
Investment Fund Foundation (UK), 363 F.Supp.3d 361 (SDNY, 30 January 2019); In re Hanwei Guo, 2019 WL 917076
(SDNY, 25 February 2019).
70
ZF Automotive US, Inc. v Luxshare, Ltd. and AlixPartners LLP v Fund for Protection Investors’ Rights in Foreign
States 596 US (2022), p. 11.
71
Ibid., pp. 6–11.
72
Ibid., p. 12.
73
Ibid., pp. 12–16.
74
Ibid., p. 15.
75
Yesilirmak, ‘Interim and conservatory measures in ICC arbitral practice, 1999– 2008’ (2011) Special Supplements of
the ICC Bulletin: Interim, Conservatory and Emergency Measures in ICC Arbitration 6.
76
English Arbitration Act 1975.
77
Channel Tunnel Group v Balfour Beatty Ltd, Commercial Court, 27 November 1991, at [367].
78
Channel Tunnel Group v Balfour Beatty Ltd, Court of Appeal, 22 January 1992.
79
Channel Tunnel Group v Balfour Beatty Ltd [1993] AC 334, at 367.
80
The former English arbitration legislation was amended to take account, inter alia, of some of the difficulties that the
courts faced in the Channel Tunnel case. The Court of Appeal, which would have been prepared to grant an injunction,
considered that it had no power to do so, because the arbitration agreement provided for arbitration in Brussels. The
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 44(2)(e), provides that the powers of the court that are ‘exercisable in support of arbitral
proceedings’ include the granting of an interim injunction, and this section of the Act applies even if the seat of the
arbitration is outside England (s. 2(3)). There may be resort to the courts if, or to the extent that, the arbitral tribunal
or any other person empowered by the parties to decide the case ‘has no power or is unable for the time being to act
effectively’ (s. 44(5)).
81
For different approaches to the granting of court injunctions pending arbitration, see Judgment of 14 October 2016, Civil
Procedure Preservation Ruling Regarding Ocean Eleven Shipping Corp. v Lao Kaiyuan Mining Sole Co. Ltd, E72 Cai
Bao No. 427 (Wuhan Maritime Ct.); Chen Hongqing v Mi Jingtian and another [2017] HKCFI 1148 (Hong Kong High
Court); Petrobras v Tractebel Energia & MSGAS, Case No. AgRg MC 19.226-MS (2012/0080171-0), Superior Court
of Justice of Brazil, 29 June 2012; Discovery Geo Corporation v STP Energy Pte Ltd, High Court of New Zealand,
19 December 2013.
82
For example, in a 2010 decision, a Paris court held that French courts cannot interfere with arbitral proceedings: SA
Elf Aquitaine and Total v Mattei, Lai. Kamara and Reiner, Paris Court of First Instance, 6 January 2010. While in
less categorical terms, US and English courts have expressed great reluctance to issue anti-arbitration injunctions: see
Reisman and Iravani, ‘The changing relation of national courts and international commercial arbitration’ (2010) 21
Am Rev Intl Arb 33; see also Sabbagh v Khoury [2019] EWCA Civ. 1219, at [110]ff emphasising the exceptional nature
of the grant of an anti-arbitration injunction.
83
Benteler v Belgium (1985) 8 European Commercial Cases 101.
84
Quoted in Himpurna California Energy Ltd (Bermuda) v Republic of Indonesia (2000) XXV YBCA 11, at [169].
85
Ibid., at [184].
86
Ibid., at [181].
87
National Grid v Argentina, Decision of the Fourth Chamber of the Camera Contencioso-Administrativo Federal, 2 July
2007.
88
Société Générale de Surveillance SA (SGS) v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Pakistan Supreme Court, 3 July 2002. For
a detailed analysis of the case, see Lau, ‘Note on Société Générale de Surveillance v Pakistan ’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 179.
89
Paragraph 7.35.
90
These complications appear to be decreasing over time, due to the ‘trend toward broader recognition and enforcement
of arbitral interim measures, even in the absence of an express statutory provision to that effect’: Castello and Chahine,
‘Enforcement of interim measures’, in Rowley KC, Gaillard, and Kaiser (eds) The Guide to Challenging and Enforcing
Arbitration Awards (Global Arbitration Review, 2019), p. 108.

Section C. - During the Arbitral Proceedings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638648 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
91
New York Convention, Art. III: ‘Each Contracting State shall recognize arbitral awards as binding and enforce them in
accordance with the rules of procedure of the territory where the award is relied upon, under the conditions laid down
in the following articles.’ Crucially, this provision does not define an ‘award’.
92
Against this proposition, see V. V. Veeder: ‘the better view of [the New York Convention’s] application excludes
any provisional order for interim measures from enforcement abroad as a Convention award’. Castello and Chahine,
‘Enforcement of interim measures’, in Rowley KC, Gaillard, and Kaiser (eds) The Guide to Challenging and Enforcing
Arbitration Awards (Global Arbitration Review, 2019), p. 101, fn. 2. In favour, see Born: ‘The better view is that
provisional measures should be and are enforceable as arbitral awards under generally-applicable provisions for the
recognition and enforcement of awards in the Convention and most national arbitration regimes. Provisional measures
are “final” in the sense that they dispose of a request for relief pending the conclusion of the arbitration [ … ] T]here is
no reason that the term “award” should not include reasoned, signed decisions by arbitrators on requests for provisional
measures when Contracting States have (almost universally) recognized the authority of arbitrators to grant such relief.’
Born, International Commercial Arbitration (3rd edn, Kluwer Law International, 2021), pp. 2703–2704. Agnostic,
see van den Berg: ‘there does not seem to be a “prevailing view” on this question’. Cited in Castello and Chahine,
‘Enforcement of interim measures’, in Rowley KC, Gaillard, and Kaiser (eds) The Guide to Challenging and Enforcing
Arbitration Awards (Global Arbitration Review, 2019), pp. 101, 104.
93
English Arbitration Act, s. 42(1); see also Sutton et al., Russell on Arbitration (24th edn, Sweet & Maxwell, 2015),
para. 7-208.
94
(1) Pearl Petroleum Company Limited (2) Dana Gas PJSC (3) Crescent Petroleum Company Limited v The Kurdistan
Regional Government of Iraq [2015] EWHC 3361 (Comm), at [16].
95
Israel Arbitration Law of 1968, s. 1; Malaysia Arbitration Act 2005, s. 2.
96
New Zealand Arbitration Act 1996, Sch. 1, Art. 17L.
97
Swiss Rules, Art. 26.2; SIAC, Art. 30.1; SCC, Art. 37.3; NAI, Art. 35.4; JAMS, r. 24(e); ICDR, Art. 24.2; ICC, Art. 28.1;
HKIAC Administered Rules, Art. 23.3; AAA, R-37.b; LCIA Rules, Art. 25 (silent as to the form of interim measures).
98
ICC Rules, Art. 33.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
