Introduction, UKBC-ICCARBN 466228224 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Introduction
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part II - Models, Precedents and Examples
Part II: Models, Precedents and Examples
Introduction
1.
II-0
As noted in prior editions, there is no procedural code of procedure for ICC arbitration. The basic principle is that the parties
are free to structure their case within the overall framework of the Rules, the ICC’s administrative practices and applicable law.
2.
The ICC has set out detailed provisions as to how it expects an ICC arbitration to be conducted in its Note to the Parties and
Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration. The latest version of the Note on the
Conduct of ICC Arbitration was issued on 1 January 2021 and is set out in Part II, as Document 3.1. 1
3.
In addition, the ICC has established various forms and checklists for the conduct of ICC arbitrations. The most recent forms and
checklists can be found at https://iccwbo.org/dispute-resolution-services/arbitration/practice-notes-forms-checklists/ [accessed
20 September 2021]. For ease of reference, several of these forms and checklists are also set out below. Moreover, in most ICC
arbitrations it is obligatory for the Tribunal to prepare Terms of Reference and a Procedural Timetable and therefore examples
of these documents are set out below (Documents 7 and 9).
4.
The Secretariat, the Parties and the members of the Tribunal prepare various documents to administer the arbitration. The ICC
Court does not itself send documents to the parties or the Tribunal. The ICC Court communicates with the Parties and the
Tribunal through the Secretariat.
All documents are © International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). Reproduced with permission of ICC. The text reproduced here
is valid at the time of reproduction in October 2021. As amendments may be made to the text, please refer to the website https://
iccwbo.org/dispute-resolution-services for the latest version and for more information on ICC dispute resolution services. Also
available in the ICC Digital Library at http://library.iccwbo.org.
Footnotes
1
See para.0-7.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
