Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638615 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section A. - Overview
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 3 - Applicable Laws
Section A. - Overview
(a) Introduction
3. 01
Many disputes that are referred to arbitration are determined by arbitral tribunals with no more than a passing reference to the
law. They turn on matters of fact: what was said and what was not said; what was promised and what was not promised; what
was done and what was not done.
3. 02
It would be wrong to deduce from this, however, that international arbitration exists in a legal vacuum. Billions of contracts
—most of them made orally, rather than in writing—are made every day throughout the world. They may be as simple as the
purchase of a bus ticket or the hire of a taxi, or they may be as complex as the purchase of a company with financing. Most
are made, performed—and forgotten. Yet law governs each of these situations. The apparent simplicity of the purchase of a bus
ticket or the hire of a taxi is deceptive. They are transactions that involve a contractual relationship and such relationships are
underpinned by complex rules of law. These rules may not be referred to expressly, but they exist nonetheless:
It is often said that the parties to a contract make their own law, and it is, of course, true that, subject to the rules
of public policy and ordre public, the parties are free to agree upon such terms as they may choose. Nevertheless,
agreements that are intended to have a legal operation (as opposed to a merely social operation) create legal rights
and duties, and legal rights and duties cannot exist in a vacuum but must have a place within a legal system
which is available for dealing with such questions as the validity, application and interpretation of contracts, and,
generally, for supplementing their express provisions. 1
3. 03
Like a contract, an arbitration does not exist in a legal vacuum. It is regulated, first, by any specific rules of procedure that have
been agreed or adopted by the parties and the arbitral tribunal; secondly, it is regulated by the law of the place of arbitration. It
is important to recognise at the outset (as even distinguished judges and commentators sometimes fail to do)—that this dualism
exists.
3. 04
For the most part, modern laws of arbitration are content to leave parties and arbitrators free to decide upon their own specific
rules of procedure, so long as the parties are treated equally. Under these modern laws, it is accepted that the courts of law should
be slow to intervene in an arbitration, if they intervene at all. 2  Nevertheless, those rules need the sanction of law if they are to
be effective and, in this context, the relevant law is the law of the place or seat of the arbitration. This is referred to as the lex
arbitri. This is an important—and frequently misunderstood—topic, to which it will be necessary to return later in this chapter.
(b) A complex interaction of laws
3. 05

Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638615 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
International arbitration, unlike its domestic counterpart, usually involves more than one system of law or of legal rules. Indeed,
it is possible, without undue sophistication, to identify at least five different systems of law that, in practice, may have a bearing
on an international arbitration:
 
i.the law governing the arbitration agreement and the validity, scope, and enforcement of that agreement;
 
ii.the law governing the existence and the proceedings of the arbitral tribunal (the lex arbitri or, as it is sometimes called,
the curial law);
 
iii.the law, or the relevant legal rules, governing the substantive issues in dispute (generally described as the ‘applicable
law’, the ‘governing law’, the substantive law’, or ‘the proper law of the contract’);
 
iv.other applicable rules and non-binding guidelines and recommendations; 3  and
 
v.the law governing recognition and enforcement of the award (which may, in practice, prove to be not one law, but two
or more systems of law, if recognition and enforcement is sought in more than one country in which the losing party has,
or is thought to have, assets). 4
3. 06
This chapter deals with: the law governing the agreement to arbitrate; the law governing the arbitration itself (the lex arbitri); the
law governing the substantive matters in dispute (the substantive law); the law or rules governing conflicts of law; and certain
non-national guidelines and rules that are increasingly relied upon in international arbitration. Another relevant law, the law
governing the parties’ capacity to enter into an arbitration agreement has been dealt with in Chapter 2, and issues relating to the
laws governing the arbitral award (including challenge, recognition, and enforcement) are dealt with in Chapters 10 and 11.
Footnotes
1
McNair, ‘The general principles of law recognised by civilised nations’ (1957) 33 BYIL 1, at 7.
2
The lead is given by the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration Model Law on International
Commercial Arbitration 1985 (as amended in 2006) (the Model Law), which states categorically that, ‘[i]n matters
governed by this Law, no court shall intervene except where so provided in this Law’. See Model Law, Art. 5. This
judicial deference to pending arbitrations is generally widely applied in practice. Even states that have not adopted
the Model Law per se have thought it appropriate to make a similar statement. For instance, Swiss law states that its
courts will ‘decline jurisdiction’ where there is an agreement to arbitrate, except in limited circumstances; see Swiss
Private International Law Act 1987 (as amended in 2021) (Swiss PIL), s. 7. The Swedish Arbitration Act 2019 (Swedish
Arbitration Act) contains a similar provision, at s. 4, although ss. 5 and 6 contain exceptions to this rule. The French
Code of Civil Procedure provides for the same at Art. 1458 and the Spanish Arbitration Act 2003, which is based on
the Model Law with significant changes, states unequivocally at Art. 7 that, ‘[i]n matters governed by this Act, no court
shall intervene except where so provided in this Act’. Similarly, while the primary federal statute governing arbitration
in the United States, the Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 (FAA), pre-dates and is not modelled on the Model Law, US
courts have interpreted the FAA’s provisions in a manner that is consistent with the Model Law. Thus, in Stanton v Paine
Webber Jackson & Curtis, Inc., 685 F.Supp. 1241, 1242 (S.D. Fla. 1988), the US District Court for the Southern District
of Florida held that ‘[n]othing in the [FAA] contemplates interference by the court in an ongoing arbitration proceeding’.
3
Sometimes referred to as the procedural ‘soft law’ of international arbitration: see Park, ‘The procedural soft law of
international arbitration: Nongovernmental instruments’, in Mistelis and Lew (eds) Pervasive Problems in International
Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2006), pp. 141–154.
4
See Chapter 11.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
