Article 18(1), UKBC-ICCARBN 474406928 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 18(1)
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
International systems from a procedural point of view
Article 18(1)
“The place of the arbitration shall be fixed by the Court, unless agreed upon by the parties.”
18-16
The basic rule is that the parties may freely choose, and agree on, the place of arbitration. If the parties agree on the place of
arbitration, the ICC Court is generally viewed as having no power to change the place of arbitration. By choosing international
arbitration, parties are opting out of national court systems. By choosing the place of arbitration, the parties are designating
the national court system that will have supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitration. The fact that parties are free to choose
whatever place of arbitration they wish is therefore an integral part of the respect for the autonomy of the parties in international
arbitration. 48
18-17
Parties may choose the place of arbitration in their arbitration agreement or may agree on a place of arbitration after a dispute has
arisen. In the latter case, the place of arbitration will presumably have been carefully considered. For places of arbitration that
are set out in the arbitration agreement, there is a debate about the importance that should be attributed to the parties’ agreement.
The views range from treating the choice of the place of arbitration as a last-minute happenstance to attributing the matter to
careful analysis of the merits of the proposed place of arbitration. Of course, the importance will depend on the facts of the case.
18-18
If the parties have not agreed on a place of arbitration, it is set by the ICC Court. It is not for the Tribunal to fix the place of
arbitration, unless the parties have given it the power to do so, which very rarely happens, and is not to be recommended in
ICC arbitrations. 49
18-19
At the outset, there may be an issue of whether the parties have agreed on the place of arbitration. There are many variants on
language that have been held to amount to or to not amount to an agreement as to the place of arbitration. A frequent issue
concerns clauses such as the “ICC Paris arbitration” clause. The issue in these types of cases is whether the reference to Paris
is intended to indicate a reference to the ICC (as it is mainly based in Paris) or whether it is intended to refer to the place of
arbitration (as the ICC does not contain a reference to Paris in its name). In such situations, the Secretariat normally seeks the
parties’ comments so as to provide them to the ICC Court. Unless all the parties indicate that Paris was not intended to be the
place of arbitration, the ICC Court may well find that Paris was the agreed place of arbitration rather than to find that there was
no agreement as to the place of arbitration. If there is a reference such as “ICC Geneva”, the ICC Court is likely to find that the
reference to Geneva was intended to be a reference to the place of arbitration.
18-20
In construing these clauses to determine whether there has been an agreement as to the place of arbitration, the governing law
is the law of the arbitration agreement. Therefore, the principles of interpretation will be based on that law as will the material
that can be reviewed to determine whether there was an agreement between the parties. 50
18-21

Article 18(1), UKBC-ICCARBN 474406928 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
If it is not clear whether the parties have agreed on the place of arbitration, the ICC Court will decide whether there has been an
agreement on the place of arbitration or whether it falls upon the court to fix the place of arbitration in accordance with art.18(1).
18-22
If the ICC Court decides whether the parties have agreed on the place of arbitration, the ICC Court is in fact interpreting the
arbitration agreement. However, the ICC Court’s decision is and remains an administrative one and is rendered without providing
reasons. 51  This raises the issue as to whether the Tribunal should itself rule on whether or not the arbitration clause did amount
to an agreement between the parties as to the place of arbitration. Given the consequences on the arbitration procedure, it would
appear to be important that the Tribunal confirms its interpretation of the arbitration agreement and whether in the Tribunal’s
view it also determines the place of arbitration. Moreover, if the issue is the interpretation of the language of the arbitration
agreement, then a final decision on the place of arbitration would appear to require an award rather than a procedural order. 52
18-23
In one ICC case, 53  the ICC Court was called to decide on the place of arbitration on the basis of the following arbitration
agreement:
“Arbitration shall be conducted in Madrid, Spain in accordance with Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration if X.
is the respondent, and by the Japan Commercial Arbitration Association in Tokyo, Japan, in accordance with the
Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce if Y. is the respondent.”
18-24
The claimant (X) alleged that there was no agreement between the parties and requested that the ICC Court fix a neutral place
of arbitration. The respondent (Y) opposed such request and submitted that Tokyo was the place of arbitration agreed between
the parties. The ICC Court fixed Tokyo as place of arbitration, that is in the country of respondent Y. In doing so, the ICC Court
has considered that there was a valid agreement, and its decision to fix Tokyo as the place of arbitration was consistent with
the agreement of the parties. If the ICC Court had felt that there was no agreement on the place of arbitration, it would have
fixed the place of arbitration in a third neutral country to both parties.
18-25
In interpreting arbitrations clauses, the ICC Court’s practice has been to fix Paris, France as the place of arbitration in
circumstances where at least one party asserts that this was the intention. Therefore, if there is a reference to the “International
Chamber of Commerce, Paris”, the ICC will tend to designate Paris as the place of arbitration. In a recent case, the arbitration
clause referred to the “International Chamber of Commerce, Paris”. The claimant proposed that Paris, France be the place of
arbitration. The respondent requested that it be in Switzerland as the reference to Paris was only meant as an indication of the
arbitral institution. In addition, the parties could not decide at the time of signature of the Agreement on the place of arbitration
in Paris. Prior to the submission of the case to the ICC Court, the Secretariat informed the parties that the usual practice of the
ICC Court is to fix Paris, France, as the place of arbitration in circumstances where at least one of the parties asserts that this
was the intention. Accordingly, the Secretariat suggested that the court fix Paris, France as the place of arbitration. The ICC
Court’s practice does however vary, which makes it at times difficult to predict how the ICC Court will decide the issue of the
place of arbitration in clauses referring to the “ICC, Paris”, the “ICC in Paris”, the “ICC of Paris” and the like, when no other
place of arbitration is mentioned in the arbitration clause. 54
18-26
Prior to the decision of the ICC Court, the parties are generally required to comment on the place of arbitration in the Request
pursuant to art.4(3)(h) and in the Answer pursuant to art.5(1)(f). Therefore, if a party wishes to argue that there was an agreement
on the place of arbitration or that certain factors are relevant to the choice of the place of arbitration, it should set out its
arguments in the Request or Answer, as the case may be. However, it is not infrequent that the parties file additional letters and
materials with the Secretariat relating to the place of arbitration.
18-27
If the ICC Court decides that there is a real issue as to whether there is an agreement on the place of arbitration or where that
place is, the ICC Court may provisionally decide on a place of arbitration and let the Tribunal decide the issue.

Article 18(1), UKBC-ICCARBN 474406928 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
18-28
If the ICC Court decides that there has been no agreement on the place of arbitration, it will take various factors into account in
fixing the place of arbitration, although, as with its other decisions, the ICC Court does not provide reasons in deciding on the
place of arbitration. One point of reference for the factors relating to the selection of the place of arbitration is the UNCITRAL
Notes. Those Notes deal with arbitration under the UNCITRAL Rules and not the ICC Rules and with the factors that a Tribunal
should take into consideration in setting the place of arbitration. However, they nevertheless provide a useful list of comments
and factors that have been referred to in international arbitral awards, including by ICSID Tribunals. 55  Paragraphs 29–30 of
the Notes states:
“Selection of the place of arbitration is influenced by various legal and other factors, the relative importance of
which varies from case to case. Among the more prominent legal factors are:
 
(i)The suitability of the arbitration law at the place of arbitration;
 
(ii)The law, jurisprudence and practices at the place of arbitration regarding
 
(a)court intervention in the course of arbitral proceedings,
 
(b)the scope of judicial review or of grounds for setting aside an award, and
 
(c)any qualification requirements with respect to arbitrators and counsel representation; and
 
(iii)Whether the State where the arbitration takes place and hence where the arbitral award will be made
is a Party to the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York,
1958) (the ‘New York Convention’) and/or to any other multilateral or bilateral treaty on enforcement of
arbitral awards.
When it is expected that hearings will be held at the place of arbitration, other factors may become relevant in
selecting the place of arbitration including: (i) The convenience of the location for the parties and the arbitrators,
including travel to the location; (ii) The availability and cost of support services; (iii) The location of the subject
matter in dispute and proximity of evidence; and (iv) Any qualification restrictions with respect to counsel
representation.” 56
18-29
Items (i) and (ii) in this list relate the arbitration law of the potential place of arbitration. It would be inappropriate to select as
a place of arbitration a place with a law that does not support arbitration. Item (b) by ascertaining item (iii) as to whether the
country of the place of arbitration is a signatory of the New York Convention relate to the enforceability of an award.
18-30
One of the major factors not referred to in the UNCITRAL Notes that is relevant for the ICC Court is neutrality. The ICC Court
seeks to ensure in each case that the place of arbitration does not and will not be seen as favouring one party. 57  Neutrality
has many aspects. There is a geographic aspect but also a cultural or legal one. The reality is that parties do have recourse to
national courts at the place of arbitration on some occasions.
18-31
Therefore, fixing as the place of arbitration a country with which one party is familiar and the other is not, may well be avoided. 58
18-32
For the ICC Court, the above factors would also appear to be relevant. In addition, under art.42, the ICC Court “shall make
every effort to make sure that the Award is enforceable at law” and one expects that the ICC will ensure that the country of the
place of arbitration has a robust arbitration law and is a signatory to the New York Convention.
18-33

Article 18(1), UKBC-ICCARBN 474406928 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
When fixing the place of arbitration, the ICC Court will decide on the city and not just the country. There does not appear to
be any practical possibility of recourse against the ICC Court’s decision of fixing the place of arbitration. Any such recourse
would presumably be brought in Paris, where the ICC is based. However, as discussed under art.1, the ICC Court’s decision
is an administrative one and it would be very difficult to demonstrate that the ICC Court had somehow breached the Rules in
selecting one place of arbitration over another.
18-34
If the place of arbitration has been “agreed” by the parties, then the Tribunal would not generally be permitted to overturn that
decision in the absence of factors that would otherwise enable a Tribunal to disregard an express agreement of the parties. 59
18-35
If the ICC Court decides that the arbitration agreement does not contain an agreement as to the place of arbitration and the
Tribunal decides otherwise, then the decision of the Tribunal would prevail as that reflects the agreement of the parties. However,
the authors are not aware of that having occurred. Presumably, this is because the ICC Court takes into account the possibility
of an agreement on the place of arbitration in fixing the place of arbitration, and in some cases fixes the place of arbitration on
a provisional basis only, to await the decision of the Tribunal. 60
18-36
If the place of arbitration has been “fixed” by the ICC Court, it remains unclear whether the decision of the ICC Court vests in the
Tribunal the power to fix another place of arbitration by giving the Tribunal’s own interpretation of the arbitration agreement.
In other words, there is an issue as to whether the Tribunal is free to decide to modify or to confirm the place of arbitration
previously fixed by ICC Court. Nothing would prevent the Tribunal from considering this question as it has jurisdiction to
construe this disputed aspect of the arbitration agreement. Nevertheless, the Tribunal would have very limited possibilities to
modify the place of arbitration, although it could presumably seek from the ICC Court a decision changing the originally fixed
place to another. New factors not available to the ICC Court when it initially fixed the place of arbitration would normally be
required to have the ICC Court change the place it had initially selected. Such change would also be very much subject to the
comments made by the parties who would be consulted by the Secretariat before any decision is taken by the ICC Court. 61
Similarly to the right of the Tribunal to seek a modification of the place of arbitration which was initially fixed by the ICC Court,
the parties are also entitled to request from the ICC Court a change of the place of arbitration because of modified circumstances.
In both cases, the ICC Court has the authority to do so. In at least one case, the ICC Court did change the place of arbitration
due to concern about enforceability of the award, as it had fixed the place of arbitration in a country that had not signed the
New York Convention and there was apparently doubt about the enforceability of any resulting award in relevant countries.
In that case, the ICC Court’s concern about ensuring that the award was enforceable under art.26 of the 1988 ICC Rules (now
art.42) led to reconsideration of the place of arbitration. 62
18-37
A related issue is whether the ICC Court may change the place of arbitration upon request of one party because of changed
circumstances, after the parties have “agreed” on the place of arbitration. Article 18(1) does not deal with the issue. In such a
situation, the ICC Court tends to leave the question to the Tribunal to decide whether the arbitration agreement in which the
place of arbitration is set out remains binding or not on the parties. The ICC Court does indeed not consider that it is empowered
to change the place of arbitration agreed to by the parties. 63
18-38
Whatever reasons may be invoked by the parties or the arbitrators to seek to change the place of arbitration due to concerns
about security or interference of the courts at the place of arbitration fixed by the ICC Court or initially agreed by the parties
themselves, these have to be balanced against the fact that the Tribunal is free to hold hearings elsewhere than at the place of
arbitration. As a result, if there is an issue as to the place of arbitration, logically the issue should relate more to the functioning
of the judicial system rather than to security at the place of arbitration. 64
18-39
In some cases, the parties agree with a change of the place of arbitration upon a suggestion made by the Tribunal, in which
case, it is often incorporated in the Terms of Reference.

Article 18(1), UKBC-ICCARBN 474406928 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Footnotes
48
See para.0-54 and following.
49
Indeed, the choice of the place of arbitration will not always suit both parties. Having the ICC Court rather than the
Tribunal determine the place of arbitration, prevents the Tribunal from having to take a decision at the inception of the
case which will be unpopular with one of the parties (although sometimes with both).
50
By way of example, art.4.3 of the UNIDROIT Principles with respect to interpretation of a contract provides: “In
applying Articles 4.1 and 4.2, regard shall be had to all the circumstances, including (a) preliminary negotiations between
the parties; (b) practices which the parties have established between themselves; (c) the conduct of the parties subsequent
to the conclusion of the contract; (d) the nature and purpose of the contract; (e) the meaning commonly given to terms
and expressions in the trade concerned; (f) usages.”
51
Article 5(1) of Appendix 2 which was newly introduced in the 2021 Rules does not include art.18, as in practice parties
hardly ever require reasons being given for this kind of decision of the Court.
52
As to the distinction between a procedural order and an award, see the discussion see at para.34-5 and following.
53
ICC Case No.14190 (2006), unreported; the parties settled their dispute without ever having had a meeting at the place
of arbitration.
54
See also 2012 Secretariat’s Guide, para.3-683.
55
See for example ICSID Case No. Arb (AF)/00/1, Procedural Order No.2 of 11 July 2001, ADF Group Inc v
United States of America which can be found at http://icsid.worldbank.org [accessed 28 April 2021]. The ICSID
site includes the submissions of the parties on the place of arbitration, which is also very helpful. See, ICSID Case
No.ARB(AF)/14/3), Corona Materials, LLC v Dominican Republic, Procedural Order, 16 December 2015 https://
icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/cases/casedetail.aspx?CaseNo=ARB(AF)%2f14%2f3 [accessed 28 April 2021]; ICSID
Case No.ARB(AF)/07/4), Mobil Investments Canada Inc. and Murphy Oil Corporation v Canada, Procedural Order
No.1, Decision of the Tribunal on the Place of Arbitration, 7 October 2009 https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/cases/
casedetail.aspx?CaseNo=ARB(AF)%2f07%2f4 [accessed 28 April 2021].
56
2016 UNCITRAL Notes on Organizing Arbitral Proceedings, note 29–30, pp.7–8.
57
See the 8 principles of ICC arbitrations at para.0-17 and following.
58
For example, although Ireland and England have developed distinct arbitration statutes, they are still much closer than
England and Belgium for example. Therefore, in an arbitration between a French and English company, a jurisdiction
such as Switzerland or Germany may be viewed as more appropriate.
59
These principles will depend on the legal system. Under art.7.2.2 of the UNIDROIT Principles, a party may not require
performance where “(a) performance is impossible in law or in fact; (b) performance or, or where relevant, enforcement
is unreasonably burdensome or expensive”.
60
2012 Secretariat’s Guide, para.3-689.
61
Article 18 does not appear to prohibit reconsideration by the ICC Court of the place of arbitration, as art.18(1) is only
applicable where the parties have not agreed on the place of arbitration. However, that would presumably only occur
in very exceptional circumstances.
62
Jarvin, “The place of arbitration—A review of the ICC Court’s guiding principles and practice when fixing the place
of arbitration” [1996] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.7 No.2, p.58.
63
2012 Secretariat’s Guide, para.3-690.
64
Schwartz, “Do International Arbitrators Have a Duty to Obey the Orders of Courts at the Place of the Arbitration?
Reflections on the Role of the Lex Loci Arbitri in the Light of a Recent ICC Award” in Liber Amicorum in
honour of Robert Briner, op. cit., p.795; Knoepfler, “Note—Sentence partielle du 11 octobre 2000 dans l’affaire CCI
No.10439” (2004) Rev. Arb. No.2, p.421; Crivellaro “Note—Award of 7 December 2001 in Case No.10623—Summary
of the Arbitral Proceedings—International Arbitrators and Courts of the Seat—Who Defers to Whom?” [2003] ASA
Bull. Vol.21 No.1, p.60; Scherer, “Note—Award of 7 December 2001 in Case No.10623—The Place or ‘Seat’ of
Arbitration (Possibility, and/or Sometimes Necessity of its Transfer?)—Some Remarks on the Award in ICC Arbitration
No.10623” [2003] ASA Bull. Vol.21 No.1, p.112.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
