Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section D. - Merits of the Dispute
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 8 - Arbitration Under Investment Treaties
Section D. - Merits of the Dispute
8. 80
If jurisdictional hurdles are overcome, the question arises whether the host state has breached its substantive treaty obligations.
There is a surprising degree of uniformity between substantive protections in the treaties, aided by model treaties established
as negotiating guidelines by both capital-exporting and capital-importing nations. The essential protections are:
 
• the protection against expropriation or measures equivalent to expropriation without compensation;
 
• the right to be treated fairly and equitably;
 
• the right to full protection and security;
 
• the protection against arbitrary or discriminatory treatment;
 
• the right to national and MFN treatment;
 
• the right to the free transfer of funds and assets; and
 
• the protection against a state’s breaches of its investment obligations and undertakings. 167
(a) No expropriation without prompt, adequate, and effective
compensation
8. 81
The obligation to compensate for expropriation is among the most crucial protections provided by investment treaties. This
provision is frequently relied upon by foreign investors in treaty arbitration. The expropriation provisions in investment treaties
are quite similar. A typical provision is, for example, Article 3(1) of the United States–Argentina BIT, 168  which states:
Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized either directly or indirectly through measures tantamount
to expropriation or nationalization (‘expropriation’) except for a public purpose; in a non-discriminatory manner;
upon payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation; and in accordance with due process of law and the
general principles of treatment provided for in Article II(2). Compensation shall be equivalent to the fair market
value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriatory action was taken or became known,
whichever is earlier; be paid without delay; include interest at a commercially reasonable rate from the date of
expropriation; be fully realizable; and be freely transferable at the prevailing market rate of exchange on the date
of expropriation.
8. 82
Thus, in order to be lawful, BITs generally require that the expropriation fulfil the following cumulative requirements: (a) it
must be for a public purpose, (b) it must be non-discriminatory, (c) it must be in accordance with due process, and (d) only
effected upon payment of prompt, adequate, and effective compensation.

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
(i) Direct expropriation
8. 83
A direct expropriation involves the outright physical seizure of a foreign investor’s property, or the title to such property, by
the host state. In such cases, ‘there is an open, deliberate and unequivocal intent, as reflected in a formal law or decree or
physical act, to deprive the owner of his or her property through the transfer of title or outright seizure’. 169  For instance,
in Saint-Gobain v Venezuela, 170  the tribunal held that Venezuela had expropriated the claimant’s investments in a plant
that produced ceramic proppants (used in hydrocarbon production) by means of an actual physical takeover, followed by a
legislative decree.
(ii) Indirect expropriation
8. 84
It is now a well-accepted principle of international law that expropriation may occur indirectly, by measures resulting in
a substantial deprivation of the use and value of the investment, even though the actual title of the asset remains with the
investor. 171  As explained in Ronald S Lauder v Czech Republic: ‘The concept of indirect (or “de facto”, or “creeping”)
expropriation is not clearly defined. Indirect expropriation or nationalization is a measure that does not involve an overt
taking, but that effectively neutralizes the enjoyment of the property.’ 172
8. 85
International arbitral tribunals have recognised this principle and upheld claims for indirect expropriation when the state
has not seized the investment but has taken measures that have destroyed its value. For example, in Total v Argentina, the
tribunal explained:
[U]nder international law a measure which does not have all the features of a formal expropriation could be
equivalent to an expropriation if an effective deprivation of the investment is thereby caused. An effective
deprivation requires, however, a total loss of value of the property such as when the property affected is rendered
worthless by the measure, as in case of direct expropriation, even if formal title continues to be held. 173
8. 86
Indirect expropriation can also arise from a deprivation of control or interference in management by the state, thus preventing
the investor from controlling the day-to-day operation of the investment. Such measures would include:
depriving the investor of control over the investment, managing the day-to-day operations of the company,
arresting and detaining company officials or employees, supervising the work of officials, interfering in
administration, impeding the distribution of dividends, interfering in the appointment of officials or managers,
or depriving the company of its property or control in whole or in part. 174
In evaluating the degree to which the host state’s measures have interfered with the investor’s rights, tribunals typically
consider the economic impact of the measures on the investment, their interference with the investor’s reasonable
expectations, and their duration. 175
8. 87
Under exceptional or ‘extreme’ circumstances, the imposition of taxes, which are considered part of a state’s regulatory
powers, can be expropriatory. In the Burlington case, 176  the tribunal explained that ‘a tax measure may be tantamount to
expropriation if (i) it produces the effects required for any indirect expropriation and (ii) in addition, it is discriminatory,
arbitrary, involves a denial of due process or an abuse of rights’.

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
(iii) Acts contrary to undertakings and assurances granted to investors may constitute
indirect expropriation
8. 88
States may also expropriate foreign investments by means of measures that interfere with assurances that they offered to
investors to induce them to invest. The assurances that states offer to create a favourable investment environment may amount
to essential conditions for those investments and, as such, may form part of the legal framework underlying, and protecting,
those investments. A failure by the state to honour those undertakings may give investors who reasonably relied on them
a right to compensation.
8. 89
International arbitral tribunals have held that government assurances and undertakings create ‘acquired rights’ for
investors. 177  The rationale is simple. Investors looking to invest in developing countries cannot predict with confidence that
conditions of stability and security will exist throughout the period of their investment; thus the state may provide certain core
promises to foreign investors (in contracts, concessions or licences), which motivate the decision to invest. If those promises
are unilaterally withdrawn by the state within the agreed lifespan of the investment (for example a thirty-year concession) in
a manner that destroys the value of the investment, then an indirect expropriation may have occurred. 178
8. 90
The tribunal in CME v Czech Republic 179  reached such a conclusion when it was asked to consider the expropriation claim
of an investor in a joint venture in the Czech Republic. The investor alleged that the joint venture collapsed after the Czech
broadcasting authority forced the investor to give up its exclusive licensing rights and changed other key terms of the joint
venture agreement. The tribunal held that the acts of the Czech regulatory authority interfered with the ‘economic and legal
basis of CME’s investment’ and ‘destroy[ed] the legal basis (“the safety net”) of the Claimant’s investment’, which ruined
the ‘commercial value of the investment’ and thus amounted to expropriation.
8. 91
However, in the absence of such government assurances or undertakings, the effects alone (as grave as they may be) may
be insufficient to constitute expropriation. In the Methanex case, 180  the tribunal held that a non-discriminatory, bona fide
regulation within the police powers of the state, which banned a harmful gasoline additive containing methanol, had not
expropriated Methanex, a Canadian producer of methanol, in the absence of a breach of specific commitments by the state.
8. 92
Similarly, a simple breach of contract by a state does not amount to an expropriation in the absence of an act of the state
in its sovereign (as opposed to contractual) capacity. 181  The Waste Management 182  tribunal explained: ‘[I]t is one thing
to expropriate a right under a contract and another to fail to comply with the contract. Non-compliance by a government
with contractual obligations is not the same thing as, or equivalent or tantamount to, an expropriation.’ Tribunals have
nevertheless found that contractual rights were expropriated where a state acted in a sovereign manner by terminating a
contract by decree, 183  and following a series of ‘sovereign acts designed illegitimately to end the concession or to force
its renegotiation’. 184
8. 93
In sum, the paramount concern of tribunals in indirect expropriation cases is whether a state’s interference with prior
assurances that it gave to an investor, be it direct or indirect, express or covert, creeping or not, deprives the investor, in whole
or in significant part, of the use or reasonably expected benefit of its investment. 185

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
(iv) Purpose of the host state’s measures does not affect their characterisation
8. 94
The form of measures or their motive is irrelevant if the effect is to deprive the owner of the economic benefit of the asset. 186
Arbitral tribunals have held that it is immaterial that the property was expropriated for laudable environmental reasons, 187
or as part of the political reorientation of the country. 188
8. 95
Although the purpose of an expropriatory measure may affect its legality, it does not affect the host state’s obligation to
provide the expropriated investor with prompt and adequate compensation. This point was affirmed by the ICSID tribunal
in Compañía del Desarrollo de Santa Elena SA v Costa Rica:
Expropriatory environmental measures—no matter how laudable and beneficial to society as a whole—are, in
this respect, similar to any other expropriatory measures that a state may take in order to implement its policies:
where property is expropriated, even for environmental purposes, whether domestic or international, the state’s
obligation to pay compensation remains. 189
8. 96
Whilst considering whether there has been expropriation in a particular case, a tribunal need not examine each state measure
in isolation. If the cumulative effect of multiple state measures is substantially to deprive the investor of the use, value, and
enjoyment of its investment, expropriation may still be construed. 190  This is known as ‘creeping expropriation’. As the
tribunal noted in Siemens AG v Argentina:
By definition, creeping expropriation refers to a process, to steps that eventually have the effect of an
expropriation. Obviously, each step must have an adverse effect but by itself may not be significant or
considered an illegal act. The last step in a creeping expropriation that tilts the balance is similar to the straw
that breaks the camel’s back. The preceding straws may not have a perceptible effect but are part of the process
that led to the break. 191
(b) ‘Fair and equitable treatment’ and the international minimum
standard
8. 97
Almost all investment treaties require host states to accord ‘fair and equitable treatment’ to investors of the other contracting
state. 192  It is the treaty standard most frequently invoked before investment tribunals and the one most frequently found to be
breached. To highlight the significance of this standard of protection, it is frequently addressed at the beginning of the general
treatment clauses. For example, Article II(2)(a) of the United States–Argentina BIT 193  provides: ‘Investment shall at all times
be accorded fair and equitable treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case be accorded treatment less
than that required by international law.’
8. 98
It is difficult to reduce the words ‘fair and equitable treatment’ to a precise statement of a legal obligation. They grant
considerable discretion to tribunals to review the ‘fairness’ and ‘equity’ of government actions in light of all of the facts and
circumstances of the case. 194

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
8. 99
International arbitral tribunals called upon to decide cases on the basis of the ‘fair and equitable treatment’ standard have
developed the elements of the obligation that it imposes upon states. 195  In accordance with the ‘plain meaning’ approach
required by the Vienna Convention, tribunals have concluded, based on the object and purpose of the treaties, that the standard
is intended to accord to foreign investors broad objective protections. These include a stable and predictable investment
environment, in order to maximise investments. 196  As the tribunal noted in LG&E Energy Corporation and ors v Argentina:
[T]he stability of the legal and business framework in the State party is an essential element in the standard of
what is fair and equitable treatment. As such, the Tribunal considers this interpretation to be an emerging standard
of fair and equitable treatment in international law. 197
8. 100
However, other tribunals have stressed that the fair and equitable treatment standard does not provide investors with blanket
protection against changes in the host state’s law. The inquiry is properly focused on reasonableness and proportionality, and ‘a
foreign investor can expect that the rules will not be changed without justification of an economic, social or other nature’. 198
However, in the absence of a specific commitment from the state, a change in the legal framework will not typically breach the
fair and equitable treatment standard unless such alteration is ‘total,’ 199  or amounts to a ‘radical unpredictable transformation
in the conditions of the investment’. 200
8. 101
International arbitral tribunals have identified the protection of investors’ legitimate expectations as the ‘dominant element’ 201
of the fair and equitable treatment standard. In order to determine if a state’s measures violate the standard, tribunals frequently
examine ‘the impact of the measure on the reasonable investment-backed expectations of the investor; and whether the state
is attempting to avoid investment-backed expectations that the state created or reinforced through its own acts’. 202  It is on
this basis that the UNCITRAL ad hoc tribunal in CME v Czech Republic 203  found that the Czech Republic’s legislative and
regulatory changes had unlawfully harmed CME’s investment by altering the country’s investment framework, and held that
the government had ‘breached its obligation of fair and equitable treatment by evisceration of the arrangements in reliance upon
[which] the foreign investor was induced to invest’.
8. 102
In Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA v Mexico, 204  the basic expectation of the claimant was that the laws applicable to
its investment in a landfill for hazardous waste would be used by the government for the purpose of assuring compliance with
the environmental and health goals underlying such laws. In particular, upon making its investment, the claimant ‘reasonably
trusted, on the basis of existing agreements and of the good faith principle’ that the permit it acquired in order to make its
investment would continue in full force and effect. 205  As held by the tribunal, however, the relevant Mexican federal agency
later refused to renew the claimant’s permit for political reasons arising from local community opposition unrelated to the
underlying environmental and health goals. 206  This conduct constituted a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard.
8. 103
In order to qualify for protection, the investor’s expectations must be reasonable, based on the conduct of the state and reasonable
reliance by the investor in making the investment, as explained by the tribunal in LG&E:
[T]he investor’s fair expectations have the following characteristics: they are based on the conditions offered by
the host State at the time of the investment; they may not be established unilaterally by one of the parties; they
must exist and be enforceable by law; in the event of infringement by the host State, a duty to compensate the
investor for damages arises except for those caused in the event of state of necessity; however, the investor’s fair
expectations cannot fail to consider parameters such as business risk or industry’s regular patterns. 207
8. 104

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
It has been held that failure to ensure due process, consistency, and transparency in the functioning of public authorities, 208
and the lack of a predictable and stable framework for investment contrary to the legitimate expectations of the investor
and commitments made by the host state, 209  are breaches of fair and equitable treatment standards. 210  The legal stability
requirement does not require that a state’s legal system remain frozen in time. However, legislative changes that are unfair and
inequitable in the face of specific commitments to the contrary may constitute a compensable treaty breach:
Save for the existence of an agreement, in the form of a stabilisation clause or otherwise, there is nothing
objectionable about the amendment brought to the regulatory framework existing at the time an investor made
its investment [ … ] What is prohibited however is for a State to act unfairly, unreasonably or inequitably in the
exercise of its legislative power. 211
8. 105
The fair and equitable standard has also been held to be breached by the effective discrimination of host states in favour of
domestic entities. In Eastern Sugar BV v Czech Republic, 212  the claimant invested in sugar factories in the Czech Republic.
Those subsidiaries were then targeted by a decree passed by the Czech authorities in a very different manner from its application
to domestic entities. 213  As explained by the tribunal, ‘the Czech Republic penalized a foreign company that had done nothing
illegal in the previous years, while Czech newcomers who had exceeded their quota within the previous years were now rewarded
for having done so’. 214  As a result, the tribunal held that the effect of one of the decrees was discriminatory, and therefore in
violation of the Netherlands–Czech and Slovak Federal Republic BIT. 215
8. 106
The standard also requires host states to offer basic protections in their internal judicial systems. Failure to provide such
protection is categorised as ‘denial of justice’. 216  Such a finding can be made ‘whenever an uncorrected national judgment is
vitiated by fundamental unfairness’. 217  Specifically, the tribunal in Azinian v Mexico 218  explained how such a claim could
be advanced in the following terms:
[A] denial of justice could be pleaded if the relevant courts refuse to entertain a suit, if they subject it to undue
delay, of if they administer justice in a seriously inadequate way [ … ] There is a fourth type of denial if justice,
namely the clear and malicious misapplication of the law. 219
8. 107
In summary, it is therefore now possible to identify certain kinds of conduct and treatment that would be likely to constitute
a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard. As explained by the tribunal in Joseph Charles Lemire v Ukraine, 220
the standard requires ‘an action or omission by the State which violates a certain threshold of propriety, causing harm to the
investor, and with a causal link between action or omission and harm’. In assessing that threshold of propriety, a tribunal will
consider whether:
 
• the state has failed to offer a stable and predictable legal framework;
 
• the state made specific representations to the investor;
 
• due process has been denied to the investor;
 
• there is an absence of transparency in the legal procedure or in the actions of the state;
 
• there has been harassment, coercion, abuse of power, or other bad faith conduct by the host state; and
 
• any of the actions of the state can be labelled as arbitrary, discriminatory, or inconsistent. 221
8. 108
There is disagreement over whether the concept of ‘fair and equitable treatment’ is synonymous with the minimum standard
of protection required by customary international law, or whether it represents an independent concept requiring greater

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
protection. 222  Under customary international law, the minimum standard has traditionally been understood to be based on a
standard of review that was set out in the 1926 Neer decision of the United States–Mexico General Claims Commission:
[T]he treatment of an alien, in order to constitute an international delinquency, should amount to an outrage, to bad
faith, to wilful neglect of duty, or to an insufficiency of governmental action so far short of international standards
that every reasonable and impartial man would readily recognize its insufficiency. 223
8. 109
The Neer standard, however, has been subject to considerable criticism on the grounds that ‘it did not lay down a general rule’
and is of only ‘limited import’ in the interpretation of investment treaties. 224
8. 110
In an oft-cited article on British investment treaty practice, one commentator concluded that:
[T]he terms ‘fair and equitable treatment’ envisage conduct which goes far beyond the minimum standard and
afford protection to a greater extent and according to a much more objective standard than any previously
employed form of words [ … ] The terms are likely to be understood and applied independently and
autonomously. 225
8. 111
Unless there is a clear and express link with the international minimum standard, tribunals have overwhelmingly interpreted fair
and equitable treatment provisions in BITs as an independent and self-contained treaty standard with an autonomous meaning,
which provides protections beyond the customary international law standard. 226
8. 112
A difficulty occurs when treaties link the fair and equitable standard to ‘international law’. Typical language is ‘fair and equitable
treatment in accordance with international law’. The argument has frequently been made that this type of reference restricts the
protection to the customary international law minimum standard of treatment. 227  However, several tribunals have concluded
that this cannot be the case, since ‘international law’, as a general reference, must also take into account treaty practice. As
the tribunal in the Vivendi case held:
The Tribunal sees no basis for equating principles of international law with the minimum standard of treatment.
First, the reference to principles of international law supports a broader reading that invites consideration of a
wider range of international law principles than the minimum standard alone. [… T]he language of the provision
suggests that one should also look to contemporary principles of international law, not only to principles from
almost a century ago. 228
8. 113
But what happens where there is a clear reference to the customary international law standard, and is it different from a stand-
alone fair and equitable treatment standard? Some tribunals have concluded that the evolution of the customary standard makes
the analysis a distinction without a difference. 229  For example, the NAFTA tribunal in Mondev v United States, 230  applying the
customary international law standard, made a clear distinction with the Neer standard and held that: ‘To the modern eye, what
is unfair or inequitable need not equate with the outrageous or the egregious. In particular, a State may treat foreign investment
unfairly and inequitably without necessarily acting in bad faith.’ 231
8. 114
It is clear that there is significant overlap between the customary and the treaty standards, and that the distinctions between the
two ‘may well be more apparent than real’. 232  Whilst the argument about the distinction between the FET and the minimum
standard of treatment continues to be made, tribunals have ‘seemed to be less interested in the theoretical discussion on the

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
relationship between the FET and the MST [minimum standard of treatment] and turned their attention primarily to the content
of the FET [fair and equitable treatment] obligation, whether or not it is qualified by the MST’. 233
(c) Full protection and security
8. 115
As in the case of ‘fair and equitable treatment’, it is difficult to give a precise meaning to the notion of ‘full protection and
security’. However, its scope may be illustrated by reference to its practical application. In contrast with most of the other
investor protections, which impose restrictions or prohibitions on certain types of host state activity, the ‘full protection and
security’ clause seeks to impose certain positive obligations on the host state to protect investments.
8. 116
Arbitral tribunals have traditionally found breaches of the ‘full protection and security’ obligation in situations in which the host
state failed to prevent physical damage to qualifying investments by not taking measures that fell within the normal exercise of
governmental functions of policing and maintenance of law and order. 234  For example, in AAPL v Sri Lanka, 235  the tribunal
held that Sri Lanka violated its obligation of full protection and security by not taking appropriate measures to prevent the
destruction of an investor’s shrimp farm and the killing of more than twenty of its employees during a counterinsurgency
operation.
8. 117
The standard applied is one of ‘due diligence’, or an obligation de moyens, requiring the host state to exercise reasonable care,
within its means, 236  to protect investments, rather than a ‘strict liability’ standard. However, there is no need for the claimant
to establish negligence or bad faith.
8. 118
The obligation of the host state to provide full protection and security to investors is independent, and not relative to the level
of protection provided by the state to its own nationals or to nationals of other states. Therefore the fact that the state did not
protect the property of its own nationals is no defence to a claim by an investor of breach of this obligation. 237  However, the
resources available to a state and the reasonable deployment of those resources will be elements that are taken into account.
For example, if, in the context of civil disturbances, a factory belonging to a foreign investor were destroyed because the police
were all protecting a neighbouring domestically owned installation, liability might well be established. If, however, the police
were fully engaged in protecting the population, and many local businesses, whether locally or foreign-owned, were damaged,
it will be difficult to establish liability.
8. 119
Whilst this standard has normally been applied in situations of physical protection of real and tangible property, its scope
has been extended to other circumstances. 238  For instance, it has been held that withdrawal of an authorisation vital to the
operation of the investment amounts to a breach of ‘full protection and security’. 239  Similarly, a change in the legal framework,
making it impossible to preserve and continue contractual arrangements underpinning the investment, has also been found to
be incompatible with a BIT’s ‘full protection and security’ provision. 240
(d) No arbitrary or discriminatory measures impairing the investment
8. 120
Most investment treaties impose an obligation upon the host state not to impair the management or operation of the investment by
arbitrary or discriminatory measures. 241  For instance, Article II(3)(b) of the United States–Ecuador BIT 242  provides: ‘Neither
Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment,
acquisition, expansion, or disposal of investments [ … ]’.

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
8. 121
The concepts of ‘arbitrary’, or ‘discriminatory’, measures are not defined in the treaties. The International Court of Justice (ICJ)
formulated the test of ‘arbitrariness’ in the context of investment protection in the ELSI case. 243  The Court observed:
Arbitrariness is not so much something opposed to a rule of law, as something opposed to the rule of law [ … ] It is
a wilful disregard of due process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of juridical propriety. 244
8. 122
In the words of the tribunal in Joseph Charles Lemire v Ukraine, 245  arbitrariness is defined as:
[ … ]
 
a.a measure that inflicts damage on the investor without serving any apparent legitimate purpose;
 
b.a measure that is not based on legal standards but on discretion, prejudice or personal preference;
 
c.a measure taken for reasons that are different from those put forward by the decision maker;
 
d.a measure taken in wilful disregard of due process and proper procedure. 246
8. 123
For instance, in the Azurix case, 247  involving an investment in a water concession, government measures that included inciting
consumers not to pay their bills, requiring the concessionaire not to apply the new tariffs resulting from a review, and denying
the concessionaire access to documentation on the basis of which it had been sanctioned, were considered to be arbitrary.
8. 124
By contrast, in the El Paso case, 248  the tribunal concluded that certain measures taken by Argentina to address the economic
crisis at the end of 2001 were reasonable, consistent with the aim pursued, had the desired result, and therefore were not tainted
by arbitrariness. The tribunal observed that there were several methods that Argentina could have employed to address the
crisis, that evidence presented by the experts demonstrated a difference of opinion as to which would have been the preferred
solution, and that, ultimately, the measures resulted in the positive evolution of Argentina’s economy.
8. 125
In relation to ‘discriminatory’ treatment, a measure is considered discriminatory if (a) ‘the intent of the measure is to
discriminate’, or (b) ‘if the measure has a discriminatory effect’. 249  As a result, although evidence of discriminatory intent
may be relevant, it is ‘the fact of unequal treatment which is key’. 250  Thus it is not essential to establish any bad faith on
the part of the host state. 251  It has been held that, in general, a measure is discriminatory in effect if it results in a treatment
of an investor that is different from that accorded to other investors in a similar or comparable situation, where there appears
to be no reasonable basis for such differentiation. 252  The issue of whether investors are in such a comparable situation is a
question of fact. Typically, tribunals have been reluctant to find that investors are in sufficiently comparable positions to take
advantage of this protection.
(e) National and ‘most favoured nation’ treatment
8. 126
Investment treaties also provide comparative protection standards—that is, standards that do not set an autonomous standard
of treatment, but rather require treatment no less favourable than that of nationals and companies of the host state (national

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
treatment), or of any other state (MFN treatment). Article 3(1) of the United Kingdom–Egypt BIT 253  is a representative
provision:
Neither Contracting Party shall in its territory subject investments or returns of investors of the other Contracting
Party to treatment less favourable than that which it accords to investment or returns of its own nationals or
companies or to investments or returns of nationals or companies of any third State.
8. 127
Since these are relative standards of protection, their scope cannot be defined in the abstract, but will vary according to the
circumstances of each case. This requires an analysis of facts, including the protections and assurances granted by the host
state to other investors.
8. 128
In order to succeed in a claim based on the national treatment or MFN provisions of a BIT, a claimant must establish that more
favourable treatment has been granted to another foreign investor or national in similar circumstances. 254  The requirement for
a similar basis of comparison is explicit in the USMCA, which provides that national treatment applies only where the foreign
and domestic investor are ‘in like circumstances’. 255  Tribunals do not require proof of discriminatory or protectionist intent in
order to find a treaty breach. However, the pursuit of legitimate policy objectives may justify differential treatment. 256
8. 129
Traditionally, the MFN clause is relied on in the context of substantive rights. For example, the host state of an investment may
provide tax concessions to French investors in the oil industry, but not to British investors in that industry. In those circumstances,
the British investor could rely on an MFN clause in the UK treaty with the host state to claim the same treatment or compensation
for the loss suffered as a result of the discrimination. However, as seen earlier, tribunals in Maffezini and other cases 257  have
extended the application of this provision from substantive to procedural matters, such as the dispute resolution mechanism
between the host state and investors. 258  This trend has led to a new generation of investment treaties that include more deliberate
language to exclude procedural rights from the reach of the MFN clause. 259
8. 130
The presence of MFN clauses in investment treaties creates a diffusive effect of investor protection, as additional gains obtained
by one state flow to other states. This can lead to the creation of a single ‘highest’ standard for all contracting parties to BITs
with a particular state.
(f) Free transfer of funds related to investments
8. 131
Many investment treaties provide guarantees relating to the free transfer of funds related to investments. For example, Article
11 of the Canada–Mongolia BIT 260  provides:
1. Each Party shall permit all transfers relating to covered investments to be made freely, and without delay,
into and out of its territory. Such transfers include:
 
1. contributions to capital; 2. profits, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalty payments,
management fees, technical assistance and other fees, returns in kind and other amounts
derived from the covered investment; 3. proceeds from the sale of all or any part of covered
investments or from the partial or complete liquidation of covered investments; 4. payments
made under a contract entered into by the investor, or covered investments, including payments
made pursuant to a loan agreement; 5. payments made pursuant to Articles 7 (Compensation

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
for Losses) and 10 (Expropriation); and 6. payments arising under Section C (Settlement of
Disputes between an Investor and the Host Party).
 
2. Each Party shall permit transfers relating to covered investments to be made in the convertible
currency in which the capital was originally invested, or in any other convertible currency
agreed to by the investor and the Party concerned. Unless otherwise agreed by the investor,
transfers shall be made at the market rate of exchange applicable on the date of transfer.
8. 132
This obligation entitles foreign investors to compensation if they are affected by currency control regulations or other host state
acts that effectively block the investor’s money in the host state. The right to free transfer of funds is critical to the value of a
foreign investment. As one tribunal noted, such guarantees are ‘fundamental to the freedom to make a foreign investment and
an essential element of the promotional role of BITs’. 261
8. 133
Free transfer provisions are generally broad in scope and are not limited to the money originally invested but also cover (as
in the Canada–Mongolia Treaty) any amounts derived from or associated with the investment, including profits, dividends,
interest, capital gains, royalty payments, management, technical assistance or other fees, or returns in kind. However, not every
cross-border movement of funds will be ‘related to the investment’ and protected by the BIT. In Continental Casualty Co. v
Argentina, 262  the tribunal held that the frustrated transfer at issue—a short-term placement to a bank account outside Argentina
for the purpose of protecting the funds from an impending devaluation of the Argentine peso—was not a transfer protected
by the BIT.
8. 134
The right to transfer funds is not to be confused with assertion of contested rights over funds. For example, in White Industries
v India, 263  the tribunal held that the retention of bank guarantees by Coal India (a state-owned company) was not a violation of
India’s obligation to ‘permit all funds of an investor related to an investment to be transferred freely without unreasonable delay’
because the provision was meant to apply to the movement of capital and exchange of currency, not assertions of contractual
rights. 264
8. 135
Treaties often provide for exceptions to the free movement of funds by allowing host states to restrict transfers during unusual
periods of low foreign exchange or balance-of-payments problems. 265  Further, it may be permissible for the host state to
maintain laws and regulations requiring reports of currency transfer, or to take measures for protection of creditor interests.
Such regulations must nevertheless comply with the other investor treaty provisions requiring fair and equitable and non-
discriminatory treatment. As the tribunal in Rusoro v Venezuela noted: 266  ‘[The free transfer of funds clause] guarantee[s]
investors that they will be able to transfer funds related to their investments and returns without delay, in a convertible currency
and at the exchange rate prevailing at the date of transfer. Provided that this triple guarantee is complied with, the BIT does not
impose restrictions on the manner in which Contracting States decide to regulate their exchange control regime.’
8. 136
In order to access the protection of the free transfer of funds provision, tribunals have held that investors need to comply with
reasonable internal formalities to transfer currency abroad. In Metalpar v Argentina 267  the tribunal refused to hold a breach of
the free transfer provision because the claimants had not complied with the established procedure for transferring funds abroad
(that is, seeking the authorisation of the central bank).
8. 137
The question arises as to what constitutes a transfer ‘without delay’ when a host state has in place a system of applications
for foreign currency. The tribunal in Air Canada v Venezuela 268  concluded that ‘the time frame should reflect the period of
time normally required to complete the necessary formalities related to the requested transfer’ by the host state. 269  In that case,
Venezuela failed to approve the conversion to hard currency of proceeds from ticket sales Air Canada earned in local currency

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
(the bolivar), contrary to its prior practice and thus locked Air Canada’s rapidly devaluing bolivares in Venezuela. Venezuela’s
conduct was held in breach of the free transfer of funds protection.
(g) Observance of specific investment undertakings
8. 138
Some treaties contain a clause whereby the host state commits to respect specific undertakings towards investors or investments.
This clause is known as the ‘umbrella clause’ due to the wide scope of protection it may potentially offer. Unlike the other
protections that we have considered, which are present in nearly all treaties, umbrella clauses are, according to one study, only
present in 40 per cent of treaties. 270  There is no standard form of wording and so each ‘umbrella clause’ needs to be carefully
considered on its own language. One example is the final sentence of Article II(2)(c) of the United States–Argentina Treaty 271
which sets out the obligation in the following terms: ‘Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with
regard to investments.’
8. 139
There is disagreement as to the whether the legal effect of umbrella clauses is to elevate any breach of contractual obligations
in direct agreements between states and investors to the level of treaty breach. 272  The award in SGS v Pakistan 273  was the first
to consider the issue of the scope of umbrella clauses. The tribunal concluded, on the terms of the particular clause in question,
that it did ‘not believe that transmutation of SGS’s contract claims into BIT claims has occurred’ through the operation of such
a clause. That tribunal also concluded that the legal consequences of such an interpretation of the BIT were ‘so far-reaching
in scope, and so automatic and unqualified and sweeping in their apparent operation, so burdensome in their potential impact
upon the contracting party’, 274  that clear and convincing evidence had to be adduced by the claimant to demonstrate that such
was the shared intent of the contracting parties to the BIT. In the absence of such evidence, the arbitral tribunal rejected the
claimant’s interpretation, which would, according to the tribunal, amount to ‘incorporating by reference an unlimited number
of state contracts as well as other municipal law instruments setting out state commitments including unilateral commitments
to an investor of the other contracting party’. 275
8. 140
This narrow interpretation of umbrella clauses was rejected in another case 276  brought by the same investor against the
Philippines under the Switzerland–Philippines BIT. 277  That case concerned Article X(2) of that treaty which stated: ‘Each
Contracting Party shall observe any obligation it has assumed with regard to specific investments in its territory by investors
of the other Contracting Party.’ The tribunal concluded that this clause did make it a breach of the BIT for the host state to
fail to observe binding contractual commitments. However, the obligations contained in the investment agreement remained
governed by the applicable law of the contract and were not elevated to international law. The practical impact of the decision
was further limited by the conclusion that compliance with undertakings was a ‘two-way street’—in other words the investor
was also bound by its obligations under a covered instrument. In the SGS v Philippines case that meant that the investor could
not bypass the contract’s dispute resolution clause and that it first had to comply with its obligation to submit its claim to local
jurisdiction in accordance with the dispute resolution clause as a precondition to an international arbitration. 278
8. 141
The diverging approaches adopted by the SGS v Pakistan and SGS v Philippines tribunals have led to the development of
conflicting lines of jurisprudence, which one leading commentator, Professor James Crawford, grouped into four ‘camps’:
The first camp adopts an extremely narrow interpretation of umbrella clauses, holding that they are operative only
where it is possible to discern a shared intent of the parties that any breach of contract is a breach of the BIT (SGS
v Pakistan; Joy Mining v Egypt).
The second camp seeks to limit umbrella clauses to breaches of contract committed by the host State in the exercise
of sovereign authority (Pan American Energy v Argentina; El Paso Energy v Argentina).

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
A third view goes to the other extreme: the effect of umbrella clauses is to internationalise investment contracts,
thereby transforming contractual claims into treaty claims directly subject to treaty rules (Fedax v Venezuela;
Eureko v Poland; Noble Ventures v Romania).
Finally there is the view that an umbrella clause is operative and may form the basis for a substantive treaty claim,
but that it does not convert a contractual claim into a treaty claim. On the one hand it provides, or at least may
provide, a basis for a treaty claim even if the BIT in question contains no generic claims clause (SGS v Philippines;
CMS v Argentina (Annulment)); on the other hand, the umbrella clause does not change the proper law of the
contract or its legal incidents, including its provisions for dispute settlement. 279
8. 142
Later cases involving umbrella clauses have continued to divide into these camps. 280  For instance, in interpreting nearly
identical umbrella clauses, the tribunals in BIVAC v Paraguay and SGS v Paraguay came to opposite conclusions. Both tribunals
determined that the umbrella clause imports contractual obligations into the investment treaty. However, the BIVAC tribunal
(like the SGS v Philippines tribunal) determined that the claim was premature because the parties had agreed to the exclusive
jurisdiction of national courts, 281  whereas the SGS tribunal determined that the forum selection clause was not a bar to the
claim’s admissibility. 282  In the words of one commentator, ‘the situation seems to remain as uncertain today as it was 10 years
ago when the first two SGS Tribunals were called to interpret and apply the clause for the first time in a legal vacuum’. 283
E. Measures of Compensation
8. 143
In the context of investment treaty arbitration, the term ‘compensation’ is commonly used to describe (a) a prerequisite for a
lawful expropriation of private property, (b) one form of reparation for injury caused by a state’s unlawful act under international
law, and/or (c) the obligation to pay damages as a consequence for a breach of contract. 284  In customary international law,
compensation is considered an alternative to restitution in the sense that ‘restitution is a primary remedy for international
wrongs, while compensation has a supplementary function in achieving the ultimate objective of reparation, viz wiping out all
the consequences of the illegal act’. 285
8. 144
The quantification of compensation is left to the arbitral tribunal’s discretion as the tribunal in Rumeli v Kazakhstan noted:
This is not a matter to be resolved simply on the basis of the burden of proof. To be sure, the tribunal must be
satisfied that the claimant has suffered some damage under the relevant head as a result of the respondent’s breach.
But once it is satisfied of this, the determination of the precise amount of this damage is a matter for the tribunal’s
informed estimation in the light of all the evidence available to it. 286
8. 145
A tribunal will award compensation, however, only if the party seeking it has established causation. As articulated by the
majority in Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v Tanzania:
Compensation for any violation of the BIT, whether in the context of unlawful expropriation or the breach of any
other treaty standard, will only be due if there is a sufficient causal link between the actual breach of the BIT and
the loss sustained by [the claimant]. 287
8. 146

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
The elements of causation include, inter alia, ‘(a) a sufficient link between the wrongful act and the damage in question, and (b)
a threshold beyond which damage, albeit linked to the wrongful act, is considered too indirect or remote’. 288  In other words,
proof of causation requires cause, effect, and a logical link between the two. 289
8. 147
The issue of compensation can be usefully considered first in terms of remedies for expropriation and remedies for other
international law breaches, before turning to certain ancillary issues (moral damages, interest, costs, and attorneys’ fees).
(a) Expropriation remedies
8. 148
The almost universal standard of compensation in expropriation established by BITs for lawful expropriations is the ‘fair market
value’ of the expropriated investment immediately prior to the expropriatory measure. This standard dates from 1938 and is
known as the ‘Hull formula’ after US Secretary of State Cordell Hull, who declared, in a dispute between the United States
and Mexico concerning the expropriation of US oil fields, that international law required Mexico to pay ‘prompt, adequate
and effective’ compensation. 290  The standard requires the payment of full market value of the expropriated asset speedily in a
convertible currency. The World Bank Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment state:
 
1.Compensation for a specific investment taken by the State will, according to the details provided below, be deemed
‘appropriate’ if it is adequate, effective and prompt.
 
2.Compensation will be deemed ‘adequate’ if it is based on the fair market value of the taken asset as such value is
determined immediately before the time at which the taking occurred or the decision to take the asset became publicly
known. 291
8. 149
Fair market value is generally accepted to mean the price at which a willing buyer and willing seller would conclude an arm’s-
length transaction. 292  As the tribunal in Starrett Housing Corporation v Iran 293  summarised it:
[ … ] the price [at which] a willing buyer would buy [ … ] and the price at which a willing seller would sell [ … ]
on condition that none of the two parties [is] under any kind of duress and that both parties have good information
about all relevant circumstances involved in the purchase. 294
8. 150
There are various accepted methods of calculating the fair market value of an asset. The fair market value of an income-
producing asset, or ‘going concern’, is often calculated by measuring its future prospects by using the discounted cash flow
(DCF) analysis. The World Bank Guidelines define DCF as:
the cash receipts realistically expected from the enterprise in each future year of its economic life as reasonably
projected minus that year’s expected cash expenditure, after discounting this net cash flow for each year by a
factor which reflects the time value of money, expected inflation, and the risk associated with such cash flow
under realistic circumstances. 295
8. 151
This is exactly what a willing buyer and seller would do in the real world when fixing a price for a business. In order to
calculate future cash flows, future revenues, operating expenditure, capital expenditure, and applicable taxes will all need to
be estimated. 296  The discount rate will, in turn, be established using a formula that takes into account the particular risk of
the industry in question by means of what is known as the ‘beta’ 297  and the relevant country risk. This exercise is usually
undertaken by expert economic witnesses.

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
8. 152
Once a figure is obtained from the DCF analysis, it is often supported by reference to comparative transactions, which show
what comparable assets in comparable countries have been sold for at similar moments in time.
8. 153
Another common valuation methodology where the affected asset is part of a publicly traded company is to look to the stock
market valuation. This is of greater value where the affected asset represents the whole (or the bulk of) the traded corporation
and the market in question is liquid.
8. 154
Where the affected asset is not publicly traded, is not a going concern, and has no clear prospect of future earning power (e.g., a
factory as yet unopened, which was to make a product in respect of which the local market is uncertain), tribunals have looked
to book value (using the numbers appearing in the asset’s accounting books or balance sheets) or ‘sunk costs’ (the repayment
of investments undertaken that cannot be recovered), with interest appropriate to the country in which the asset is located. 298
8. 155
In other contexts where the business has no inherent store of value such as mineral reserves, tribunals only establish the
value based on forward looking methodologies if future profitability can be reasonably established with a sufficient degree of
certainty. 299  This approach had been adopted earlier by the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal, where an American investor
was unable to obtain damages based on forward-looking methodology for a factory that had been expropriated before it had
started operations. 300
8. 156
The question remains as to the circumstances in which an asset with no history of revenue production may properly give rise
to a DCF-type calculation. In the Karaha Bodas and Himpurna arbitrations, which involved a geothermal power project that
was terminated, damages were awarded for lost profits notwithstanding the absence of any revenue-generating activity based
on expected future demand. 301
8. 157
Similarly, assets linked to natural resources with proven or probable reserves (such as oil fields or mines) are one class of
investments for which the market value is intrinsically linked to those reserves, rather than simply the result of a historic analysis
of revenue generation. In such circumstances, whether or not the assets are in production will not affect market value materially,
because the market values the resources proven in the ground, which will be eventually extracted by a ‘willing buyer’. 302  For
example, although the claimant in Crystallex v Venezuela had no proven track record of revenue generation from the gold mine
that it had the right to exploit, it had established proven gold reserves and resources. Since future income from ascertained
reserves could be calculated with a significant degree of certainty, even without a record of past production, Crystallex was
awarded damages based on forward-looking methodologies. 303
8. 158
There is a distinction to be drawn between the standard of compensation for lawful expropriations 304  and unlawful
expropriations. 305  In ADC v Hungary, 306  the tribunal stated that:
[T]he BIT only stipulates the standard of compensation that is payable in the case of a lawful expropriation, and
these cannot be used to determine the issue of damages payable in the case of an unlawful expropriation since this
would be to conflate compensation for a lawful expropriation with damages for an unlawful expropriation.
8. 159
In other words, if any of the cumulative conditions set out in the treaty expropriation article are not met, then (by definition)
the expropriation has not complied with the treaty obligations and the treaty standard need no longer apply. As a consequence,
tribunals have held that unlawful expropriations are to be compensated under the customary international law standard, rather

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
than under the express terms of the BIT. 307  The customary standard of compensation is set out in the famous Chorzów Factory
case as one of full reparation, which ‘must, as far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and re-establish
the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that act had not been committed’. 308
8. 160
The application of this standard may lead to higher compensation than for lawful expropriation. 309  For example, in ADC
v Hungary, 310  the asset expropriated—an airport concession—increased in value after its expropriation by the state. The
tribunal held that, in order to restore the investor to the position in which it would have been ‘but for’ the expropriation,
the investor should be awarded the higher value of the asset at the time of the award, rather than the value of the asset at
the time of expropriation (the valuation date set out in the BIT). 311  This approach was also adopted by the majority in the
ConocoPhillips v Venezuela arbitration. 312  Other tribunals, however, have found that, in certain circumstances, ‘the distinction
between compensation for a lawful expropriation and compensation for an unlawful expropriation may not make a significant
practical difference’. 313
(b) Compensation for other treaty breaches
8. 161
As in the expropriation context, a claimant who has prevailed in establishing other types of treaty breach—that is, breaches
of the ‘fair and equitable’, and other, treatment protections provided in the treaties—must also establish its entitlement to
compensation for those breaches. For instance, the tribunal in Rompetrol Group NV v Romania 314  found that the claimant had
established Romania’s breach of the BIT’s fair and equitable treatment provision but had not proven that it suffered economic
loss or damage as a result of that breach. Consequently, the tribunal awarded no compensation. By way of contrast, in Joseph
Charles Lemire v Ukraine, 315  the claimant demonstrated a causal link between the host state’s wrongful denial of public tenders
and the loss in value of his broadcasting company, showing that it was ‘probable—and not simply possible’ that his company
would have been awarded the tender but for the wrongful acts.
8. 162
Investment treaties usually do not specify the damages to which the claimant would be entitled as compensation for the host
state’s other treaty breaches. However, international tribunals have awarded damages for breach of the fair and equitable
treatment standard according to the Chorzów Factory case—that is, the ‘wiping out’ of all consequences of the illegal act.
8. 163
International tribunals have applied the Chorzów Factory principle, confirming that, under international law, treaty breaches give
rise to the obligation to compensate the economic harm that they cause in an amount equivalent to the losses that the claimant
can prove were caused by the measures in question. 316  It should be noted that, in case of successful claims for expropriation
and other treaty breaches, compensation will not be cumulative.
8. 164
In applying the Chorzów Factory principle, several tribunals have used the standard of fair market value in determining damages
for violations of fair and equitable treatment. 317  Although ‘fair market value’ is a standard employed in compensating for an
expropriation, in CMS v Argentina, 318  the tribunal resorted to the fair market value standard in assessing damages arising out
of Argentina’s breach of the treaty, noting that the standard ‘might be appropriate for breaches different from expropriation if
their effect results in important long-term losses’. The tribunal established the quantum of damages using the DCF method to
calculate the net present value (NPV) of expected cash flows. It adopted a (hypothetical) scenario without the adverse measures,
from which it subtracted the NPV of expected cash flows in the (actual) scenario with the adverse measures. 319
8. 165
Restitution also remains available as a remedy for fair and equitable treatment breaches. In Mr Franck Charles Arif v
Moldova, 320  the respondent requested the option to offer restitution instead of damages were it found to have breached its treaty

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
obligations. The tribunal obliged, noting that ‘restitution is more consistent with the objective of bilateral investment treaties,
as it preserves both the investment and the relationship between the investor and Host State’. 321  The tribunal gave Moldova
sixty days in which to make proposals for restitution and allowed the claimant to accept or reject those proposals. 322
(c) Moral damages
8. 166
It has become increasingly frequent for claimants to bring claims for ‘moral damages’, a compensatory remedy for a category of
intangible harm. 323  The first example of an award of such damages under an investment treaty was the 2008 decision in Desert
Line v Yemen. 324  The Desert Line tribunal found that it had jurisdiction to award moral damages, which may be requested
in ‘exceptional circumstances’ and by corporate claimants only in ‘specific circumstances’. It then awarded US$1 million in
damages for physical duress suffered by executives of the claimant company at the hands of government security forces, as
well as for the company’s loss to its ‘credit and reputation’. 325
8. 167
In the wake of Desert Line, a significant number of claimants have, unsuccessfully, sought moral damages. In denying a claim
for moral damages, the Lemire majority articulated a test that has been adopted in several subsequent cases, holding that moral
damages can be awarded only in exceptional cases in which:
 
• the state’s actions imply physical threat, illegal detention, or other analogous situations in which the ill-treatment
contravenes the norms according to which civilised nations are expected to act;
 
• the state’s actions cause a deterioration of health, stress, anxiety, other mental suffering such as humiliation, shame and
degradation, or loss of reputation, credit and social position; and
 
• both cause and effect are grave or substantial. 326
8. 168
Another approach was taken by an ICSID tribunal that rendered an award rejecting a claim for moral damages in a dispute
between a group of Turkish businessmen and the state of Uzbekistan on basis that the BIT in question did not protect ‘investors’
but only ‘investments’. 327
(d) Interest
8. 169
Investment arbitration tribunals routinely award interest, which forms part of the overall compensation for loss owed to a
prevailing party. For example, in the case of an expropriation, the obligation to compensate arises immediately prior to the
expropriatory act. Failure to pay compensation causes the affected investor to lose the use of those funds in the period between
the taking and payment and is part of the loss. As noted by one leading commentator: ‘The most commonly cited reason for
awarding interest is to compensate the claimant for the loss of the ability to benefit from the use of the principal sum.’ 328
8. 170
Many investment treaties provide for payment of interest in their expropriation clauses, and the International Law Commission’s
Draft Articles of State Responsibility codify the customary international law view that interest is part of full reparation for other
types of breach. 329  In deciding whether to award interest, investment arbitration tribunals consider the applicable interest rate,
the starting date for the calculation (e.g. date of expropriation), whether compounding of interest is appropriate, and whether
to grant post-award interest. 330  In the terms of the rate of interest, tribunals have adopted a number of different approaches,
including the rate in the host country, 331  the cost of capital of the investor, 332  or the borrowing rate that an investor would have
been charged, 333  among others. 334  As to the award of simple versus compound interest, the ‘overwhelming trend’ is to award

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
18
compound interest, 335  such that there is now a ‘jurisprudence constante where the presumption has shifted from a decade or
so ago with the result that it would now be more appropriate to order compound interest’. 336
(e) Costs and attorneys’ fees
8. 171
The traditional position in investment treaty arbitration, in comparison to commercial arbitration, has been for each party to bear
its own costs of legal representation and related expenses, and to divide tribunal costs equally. 337  There has, however, been a
trend towards requiring the losing party to pay the costs and legal fees of the prevailing party in certain circumstances, based on
the parties’ degree of success and/or conduct. 338  As summarised by one commentator, those circumstances may include where
the unsuccessful party (a) advances patently unmeritorious or legally untenable claims, (b) abuses the investment arbitration
process, (c) presents poor and inefficient pleadings, or (d) engages in egregious underlying conduct. 339
8. 172
This practice is consistent with the ICSID Rules and the UNCITRAL Rules. Indeed, Article 42 of the UNCITRAL Rules was
revised in 2010, and now includes a default principle that costs and legal fees shall be borne by the unsuccessful party. 340
Similarly, while the 2006 ICSID Rules did not contain any default principle concerning the allocation of costs and legal fees, 341
the 2022 Rules make it clear that in allocating the costs of the proceeding, the tribunal shall consider all relevant circumstances,
including: (a) the outcome of the proceeding or any part of it; (b) the conduct of the parties during the proceeding, including
the extent to which they acted in an expeditious and cost-effective manner and complied with these Rules and the orders and
decisions of the tribunal; (c) the complexity of the issues; and (d) the reasonableness of the costs claimed. Further, the tribunal
shall award the prevailing party its reasonable costs, unless the tribunal determines that there are special circumstances justifying
a different allocation of costs. 342
Footnotes
167
For a detailed analysis of these substantive treaty obligations, see Salacuse, The Law of Investment Treaties (3rd edn,
Oxford University Press, 2021); McLachlan, Shore, and Weiniger, International Investment Arbitration: Substantive
Principles (2nd edn, Oxford University Press, 2017); Yannaca-Small, Arbitration under International Investment
Agreements (2nd edn, Oxford University Press, 2018); Schreuer and Dolzer, Principles of International Investment Law
(Oxford University Press, 2012).
168
See fn. 43.
169
UNCTAD, Expropriation: A Sequel, Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements II (UN, 2012), available
online at http://unctad.org/
170
Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics Europe v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13, Decision
on Liability and the Principles of Quantum, 30 December 2016.
171
OECD, ‘“Indirect expropriation” and the “right to regulate” in international investment law’, Working Paper on
International Investment No. 2004/4 (September 2004), available online at http://www.oecd.org/daf/inv/investment-
policy/WP-2004_4.pdf.
172
Ronald S Lauder v Czech Republic, fn. 118, at [200].
173
Total SA v Argentine Republic, fn. 136, at [195]–[196].
174
Sempra Energy International v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award, 28 September 2007, at [284],
endorsing the criteria set out in Pope & Talbot Inc. v Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award on Damages, 31 May
2002, IIC 195 (2002). See also PSEG Global, Inc., The North American Coal Corporation, and Konya Ingin Electrik
Üretim ve Ticaret Ltd Sirketi v Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award, 19 January 2007, at [278]: ‘The
Tribunal has no doubt that indirect expropriation can take many forms. Yet, as the tribunal in Pope & Talbot found,
there must be some form of deprivation of the investor in the control of the investment, the management of day-to-day

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
19
operations of the company, interfering in the administration, impeding the distribution of dividends, interfering in the
appoint of officials and managers, or depriving the company of its property or control in total or in part.’
175
LG&E Energy Corporation, fn. 156, at [190].
176
Burlington Resources Inc., fn. 116 at [375]. See also Ampal-American Israel Corporation and ors v Arab Republic of
Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/11, Decision on Liability and Heads of Loss, 21 February 2017, at [183] (finding that
the host state’s removal of the investor’s tax-free status constituted an expropriation of a ‘defined and valuable interest
that had been validly conferred’ under local law and ‘guaranteed by the State for a defined period’).
177
Acquired rights have been defined as follows: ‘Acquired rights are any rights, corporeal or incorporeal, properly vested
under municipal law in a natural or juristic person and of an assessable monetary value. Within the scope of such rights
fall interests which have their basis in contract as well as in property, provided they concern an undertaking or investment
of a more or less permanent character.’ See O’Connell, International Law, Vol. II (2nd edn, Stevens & Sons, 1970),
pp. 763–764.
178
Fatouros, Government Guarantees to Foreign Investors (Columbia University Press, 1962).
179
CME Czech Republic BV, fn. 163, at [551], [554]–[555], and [591].
180
Methanex Corporation v United States of America, UNCITRAL, Final Award on Jurisdiction and Merits, 19 August
2005, at [7].
181
See Parkerings-Compagniet AS v Republic of Lithuania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/8, Award, 11 September 2007, at
[443]–[445];  Azurix Corporation v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Award, 14 July 2006, at [315]; Suez,
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona SA and InterAguas Servicios Integrales del Agua SA v Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on Liability, 30 July 2010, at [140]–[145]. See also Cairn Energy PLC and Cairn
UK Holdings Limited v Republic of India, A Case No. 2016-07, Final Award, 21 December 2020, at [871].
182
Waste Management Inc. v United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, 30 April 2004, at [175]. See
also Biwater Gauff, fn. 120, at [458].
183
Siemens AG, Award, fn. 158, at [271].
184
Compañia de Aguas del Aconquija, fn. 144, at [7.5.22].
185
Eureko BV v Republic of Poland, UNCITRAL, Partial Award of the Ad Hoc Committee, 19 August 2005, at [242]; ADC
Affiliate Ltd and ADC & ADMC Management Ltd v Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16, Award, 2 October
2006, at [424]; LG&E Energy Corporation, fn. 156, at [190]; Mohamed Abdel Raouf Bahgat v Arab Republic of Egypt,
Final Award, PCA Case No. 2012-07, Final Award, 23 December 2019, at [221].
186
Compañía de Aguas del Aconquija, fn. 114 at [7.5.20]: ‘There is extensive authority for the proposition that the state’s
intent, or its subjective motives are at most a secondary consideration. While intent will weigh in favour of showing a
measure to be expropriatory, it is not a requirement, because the effect of the measure on the investor, not the state’s
intent, is the critical factor’. But see UAB E Energija (Lithuania) v Republic of Latvia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/33,
Award, 22 December 2017, at [1079] (finding that, while the effect of the measure is the ‘crucial test’, some relevance
must be attached to intention, and any evidence of expropriatory intention should be carefully weighed).
187
Compañía del Desarrollo de Santa Elena, fn. 156, at [71]–[72].
188
Phillips Petroleum Co. Iran v Islamic Republic of Iran (1989) 21 Iran–US CTR 79, at [115]–[116].
189
Compañía del Desarrollo de Santa Elena, fn. 156, at [71]–[72].
190
Teinver SA, Transportes de Cercanías SA and Autobuses Urbanos del Sur SA v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/09/01, Award, 21 July 2017, at [948]–[951]; Biwater Gauff, fn. 120, at [455]. See also Weston, ‘Constructive takings
under international law: A modest foray into the problem of creeping expropriation’ (1976) 16 VJIL 103; UNCTAD,
Taking of Property, Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements (UN, 2000), available online at http://
unctad.org/en/docs/psiteiitd15.en.pdf, p. 11; Restatement (Third) of Foreign Relations Law of the United States, § 712.
191
Siemens AG, fn. 158, at [263]. See also UP (formerly Le Chèque Déjeuner) and C.D Holding Internationale v Republic
of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/35, Award, 9 October 2018, at [331].
192
UNCTAD, Fair and Equitable Treatment: A Sequel, Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements II (UN,
2012), available online at http://unctad.org/ pp. 17–35 (identifying the five ‘most important and widespread approaches
to the FET standard in treaty practice’).
193
See fn. 43.
194
See, e.g., Schreuer, ‘Fair and equitable treatment in arbitral practice’ (2005) 6 JWIT 357; Kalicki and Medeiros, ‘Fair,
equitable and ambiguous: What is fair and equitable treatment in international investment law?’ (2007) 22 ICSID Rev
—Foreign Investment LJ 24; Kinnear, ‘The continuing development of the fair and equitable treatment standard’, in
Bjorklund, Laird, and Ripinsky (eds) Investment Treaty Law: Current Issues III (British Institute of International and
Comparative Law, 2009), p. 214; Yannaca-Small, ‘Fair and equitable treatment’, in Yannaca-Small (ed.) Arbitration
under International Investment Agreements (2nd edn, Oxford University Press, 2018), pp. 510–511; UNCTAD, Fair

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
20
and Equitable Treatment: A Sequel, Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements II (UN, 2012), available
online at http://unctad.org.
195
Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets LP v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3, IIC 292 Award, 12 May
2007, at [256]–[257].
196
See decisions in which tribunals have referred to the object and purpose of the BIT to interpret the fair and equitable
treatment standard: Azurix Corporation, Award, fn. 181, at [360]; MTD Equity Sdn Bhd, MTD Chile SA v Republic of
Chile, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/17, Award, 24 May 2004, at [109]–[113]; Saluka Investments BV v Czech Republic,
UNCITRAL, Partial Award, 17 March 2006, at [300].
197
fn. 156, at [12].
198
El Paso Energy International Co., fn. 157, at [372]–[374].
199
Ibid., at [374].
200
RREEF Infrastructure (GP) Limited and RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure Two Lux Sàrl v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID
Case No. ARB/13/30, Decision on Responsibility and on the Principles of Quantum, 30 November 2018 at [315]; Silver
Ridge Power, fn. 131, at [414]–[415].
201
Saluka, fn. 196, at [302]. But see Cairn Energy PLC, fn. 181, at [1723], finding that ‘[l]egitimate expectations might
be the relevant analytical tool in some cases, but it is not to be considered the primary tool. [ … ] the Tribunal cannot
accept that the doctrine of legitimate expectations is to be treated as essentially co-extensive with the ambit of FET’.
202
Paulsson, ‘Investment protection provisions in treaties’, in ICC (ed.) Investment Protection (ICC, 2000), p. 22, para. 19.
203
CME Czech Republic BV, fn. 163, at [611].
204
ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/00/02, Award, 29 May 2003, at [157].
205
Ibid., at [160].
206
Ibid., at [164].
207
LG&E Energy Corporation, fn. 156, at [130]; Saluka, fn. 196, at [304]. Tribunals have enquired on the level of investors’
due diligence in considering the extent to which the investor actually relied on the state’s representations when investing:
see FREIF Eurowind v Kingdom of Spain, SCC Case No. 2017/060, Final Award, 8 March 2021, at [545]–[553]; RWE
Innogy GmbH and RWE Innogy Aersa SAU v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/34, Decision on Jurisdiction,
Liability and Certain Issues of Quantum, 30 December 2019, at [507], [513]; Parkerings-Compagniet AS, fn. 181, at
[335]–[336].
208
Crystallex International Corporation v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, fn. 147, at [623]; Emilio Agustín Maffezini v
Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Award, 13 November 2000, at [83].
209
Murphy Exploration & Production Company–International v Republic of Ecuador (II), PCA Case No. 2012-16, Partial
Final Award, 6 May 2016, at [292]–[293]; CME Czech Republic BV, fn. 163, at [611]; Saluka, fn. 196, at [279] and [309].
210
CMS Gas Transmission Co. v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Award, 12 May 2005, at [276] (‘fair and
equitable treatment is inseparable from stability and predictability’); see also Occidental Petroleum Corporation and
ors v Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN 3467, Final Award, 5 October 2012, at [183].
211
Parkerings-Compagniet AS, fn. 181, at [332]; CMS Gas Transmission Co. v Argentine Republic, fn. 210, at [277] (‘It
is not a question of whether the legal framework might need to be frozen as it can always evolve and be adapted to
changing circumstances, but neither is it a question of whether the framework can be dispensed with altogether when
specific commitments to the contrary have been made’).
212
SCC Case No. 088/2004, Partial Award, 27 March 2007.
213
Ibid., at [335].
214
Ibid., at [337].
215
Ibid., at [338].
216
NAFTA tribunals have held that a denial of justice would constitute a breach of the standard: see The Loewen Group
Inc. and Raymond L Loewen v United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Award, 26 June 2003, at
[132]; Waste Management, fn. 182, at [98]; International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v United Mexican States,
UNCITRAL, Award, 26 January 2006, at [194], rejecting the investors’ denial of justice claims. For a comprehensive
analysis, see Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law (Cambridge University Press, 2005).
217
Ibid., at 5.
218
Azinian and ors v United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2, Award on Jurisdiction and Merits, 1 November
1999.
219
Ibid., at [102]–[103]. See also Krederi Ltd. v Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/17, IIC 1636, Award (2018), at [455].
220
ICSID Case No ARB/06/18, Decision on Jurisdiction and Liability, 14 January 2010, at [284].
221
Ibid.

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
21
222
See Dolzer and Stevens, Bilateral Investment Treaties (Martinus Nijhoff, 1995), p. 59; BG Group PLC, fn. 121 at [275]–
[310].
223
Neer v Mexico, Opinion, United States–Mexico General Claims Commission, (1926) 4 RIAA 60, at 61–62.
224
Paulsson and Petrochilos, ‘Neer-ly misled?’ (2007) 22 ICSID Rev—Foreign Investment LJ 242, at 257.
225
Mann, ‘British treaties for the promotion and protection of investments’ (1981) 52 BYIL 241, at 244.
226
See, e.g., Cairn Energy, fn. 201, at [1702]–[1704]; Global Telecom Holding SAE v Government of Canada, ICSID Case
No. ARB/16/16, Award, 27 March 2020, at [484]. See generally Schreuer and Dolzer, fn. 167, pp. 137–138.
227
The content of the international minimum standard is itself open to debate: see UNCTAD, Fair and Equitable Treatment,
Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements (UN, 1999), available online at http://unctad.org, pp. 39–40.
See also CC/Devas (Mauritius) Ltd, Devas Employees Mauritius Private Limited and Telcom Devas Mauritius Limited
v Republic of India, PCA Case No. 2013-09, Award on Jurisdiction and Merits, 25 July 2016, at [456]; Paulsson and
Petrochilos, ‘Neer-ly misled?’ (2007) 22 ICSID Rev—FILJ 242.
228
Compañía de Aguas del Aconquija, fn. 114 at [7.4.7].
229
Pope & Talbot Inc. v Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Award on Damages, 31 May 2002, at [52] and [55];
International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation, fn. 216, at [194].
230
Mondev International Ltd v United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Final Award, IIC 173 (2002).
231
Ibid., at [116]. See also CC/Devas (Mauritius) Ltd, fn. 227 at [457]: ‘The Tribunal does not subscribe to the view that,
today, a violation of the customary minimum standard was frozen as defined in Neer [ … ] It is now generally recognized
that customary international law has evolved since 1926, some awards giving the required minimum treatment a wider
interpretation than others.’
232
Saluka, fn. 196, at [292]–[295]. See also CMS Gas Transmission Co., fn. 210, at [284]: ‘While the choice between
requiring a higher treaty standard and that of equating it with the international minimum standard might have relevance
in the context of some disputes, the Tribunal is not persuaded that it is relevant in this case. In fact, the Treaty standard of
fair and equitable treatment and its connection with the required stability and predictability of the business environment,
founded on solemn legal and contractual commitments, is not different from the international law minimum standard
and its evolution under customary law.’
233
UNCTAD, Fair and Equitable Treatment: A Sequel, Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements II (UN,
2012), available online at http://unctad.org/en/Docs/unctaddiaeia2011d5_en.pdf, p. 59.
234
Cengiz Insaat Sanayi ve Ticaret AS v Libya, ICC Case No. 21537/ZF/AYZ, Award, 7 November 2018; Asian Agricultural
Products Ltd (AAPL), fn. 15; American Manufacturing and Trading, fn. 73; Rumeli Telekom AS and Telsim Mobil
Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri AS v Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16, Award, 29 July 2008. See
generally Schreuer, ‘Full protection and security’ (2010) 1 J Intl Disp Settlement 353.
235
Asian Agricultural Products Ltd (AAPL), fn. 15.
236
Pantechniki SA, fn. 138, at [81]–[84]; Peter A Allard v Government of Barbados, PCA, Award, 13 June 2014, at [243]–
[244].
237
American Manufacturing and Trading Inc., fn. 73.
238
Waguih Elie George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/15, Award, 1 June
2009, at [445]–[448]; AES Summit Generation Ltd and AES-Tisza Erömü Kft v Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/22, Award, 23 September 2010, at [13.3.2]; Marion Unglaube and Reinhard Unglaube v Republic of Costa Rica,
ICSID Case Nos ARB/08/1 and ARB/09/20, Award, 16 May 2012, at [281]. Other tribunals, however, have rejected this
extension of the standard: see, e.g., Rumeli Telekom AS, fn. 234, at [668]–[669]; Indian Metals & Ferro Alloys Ltd v
Republic of Indonesia, PCA Case No. 2015-40, Award, 29 March 2019, at [267].
239
Antoine Goetz and ors v Republic of Burundi, ICSID Case No. ARB/95/3, Award, 10 February 1999, at [125]–[131].
240
CME Czech Republic BV, fn. 163, at [613]; National Grid Plc v Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Award, 3 November
2008, at [189]; Azurix Corporation, fn. 181, at [408].
241
Not all investment treaties use the term ‘arbitrary’; some instead refer to ‘unreasonable or discriminatory’ measures.
Tribunals differ as to the significance of this variance in the language. According to the tribunal in National Grid, fn. 240,
at [197], the terms are synonymous: ‘It is the view of the Tribunal that the plain meaning of the terms “unreasonable”
and “arbitrary” is substantially the same in the sense of something done capriciously, without reason.’ Meanwhile, the
tribunal in Glencore International AG and CI Prodeco SA v Republic of Colombia, ICSID Case No. ARB/16/6, Award,
27 August 2019, found that ‘[t]he set of unreasonable measures is wider than that of arbitrary measures’ (at [1446]),
and that ‘ “unreasonable” [includes] not only “arbitrary measures” but also measures that are irrational in themselves
or result from an irrational decision-making process’ (at [1452]).
242
Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic of Ecuador Concerning the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investment, signed on 27 August 1993, entered into force on 11 May 1997.

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
22
243
Case Concerning Elettronica Sicula SpA (ELSI) (United States of America v Italy), Judgment, 15 ICJ 76 (1999), ICGJ
95 (1989). See also LG&E Energy Corporation, fn. 156, at [158]. For a definition based on the plain meaning of the
term ‘arbitrary’, see Azurix Corporation, fn. 181, at [392] (‘In its ordinary meaning, arbitrary means “derived from
mere opinion”, “capricious”, “unrestrained”, “despotic” ’).
244
ELSI, fn. 243, at [128].
245
fn. 220.
246
Ibid., at [262].
247
Azurix Corporation, fn. 181, at [393].
248
El Paso Energy International Co., fn. 157 at [319]–[325].
249
LG&E Energy Corporation, fn. 156, at [146].
250
Marion Unglaube, fn. 238, at [263].
251
The Loewen Group Inc., fn. 216, at [132]. The tribunal was considering the judgment of a US trial court. The tribunal
observed that bad faith or malicious intention is not an essential element of unfair and inequitable treatment, and it is
sufficient if there is a lack of due process that offends a sense of judicial propriety. Although the tribunal found the trial
court proceedings to be improper and discreditable, it held against the claimant, as a result of its failure to exhaust all
remedies under the US legal system.
252
Lidercón, fn. 153, at [169]; Nykomb Synergetics Technology Holding AB v Republic of Latvia, Stockholm Rules, Award,
16 December 2003, at [64]; Saluka, fn. 196, at [313] (‘State conduct is discriminatory, if (i) similar cases are (ii) treated
differently (iii) and without reasonable justification’).
253
Treaty between the United States of America and the Arab Republic of Egypt Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement
and Protection of Investments, signed on 29 September 1982, entered into force on 27 June 1992.
254
İçkale Inşaat Limited Şirketi v Turkmenistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/24, Award, 8 March 2016, at [328]–[329];
Parkerings-Compagniet AS, fn. 181, at [368]; United Parcel Service of America Inc. v Government of Canada,
UNCITRAL, Award, 24 May 2007, at [173]–[184].
255
USMCA, Arts 14.4 and 14.5.
256
Gami Investments Inc. v United Mexican States, UNCITRAL, Award, 15 November 2004, at [114]; Parkerings-
Compagniet AS, fn. 181, at [371]. See also William Ralph Clayton and ors v Government of Canada, PCA Case No.
2009-04, Award on Jurisdiction and Liability, 17 March 2015, at [720].
257
See Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona SA, fn. 127.
258
See paragraphs 8.54–8.55.
259
See, e.g., UNCTAD, Most-Favored-Nation Treatment: A Sequel, Series on Issues in International Investment
Agreements II (UN, 2010), available online at http://unctad.org/en/Docs/diaeia20101_en.pdf, pp. 85–86 (referring to
the Chile–Colombia FTA of 2006, Annex 9.3, the Canada–Peru FTA of 2008, Annex 804.1, and the Japan–Switzerland
EPA of 2009, Art. 88).
260
Agreement between Canada and Mongolia for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed on 8 September
2016, entered into force on 24 February 2017.
261
One tribunal noted that the guarantees provided by free transfer of funds provisions are ‘fundamental to the freedom to
make a foreign investment and an essential element of the promotional role of BITs’: see Continental Casualty Co. v
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Award, 5 September 2008, at [239].
262
See fn. 261.
263
White Industries Australia Ltd v Republic of India, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 30 November 2011.
264
Ibid., at [13.2.1]–[13.2.4].
265
See, e.g., the Protocol attached to the Treaty between the United States of America and the Arab Republic of Egypt
Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investments, 29 September 1982, para. 10.
266
Rusoro Mining Ltd. v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/5, Award, 22 August 2016, at
[576]–[578].
267
Metalpar SA and Buen Aire SA v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/5, Award, 6 June 2008, at [179].
268
ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)17/1, Award, 13 September 2021.
269
Ibid., at [362].
270
Yannaca-Small, Interpretation of the Umbrella Clause in Investment Agreements, OECD Working Papers on
International Investment, 2006/03 (OECD Publishing, 2006), p. 5.
271
See fn. 43.
272
See OECD, ‘Interpretation of the umbrella clause in investment agreements’, Working Paper on International Investment
No. 2006/3 (October 2006), available online at http://www.oecd.org/; Crawford, ‘Treaty and contract in investment

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
23
arbitration’ (2008) 24 Arb Intl 351; Kunoy, ‘Singing in the rain: Developments in the interpretation of umbrella
clauses’ (2006) 7 JWIT 275.
273
SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/13, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 6 August 2003, at [156].
274
Ibid., at [167].
275
Ibid., at [168].
276
SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA, fn. 165.
277
Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Republic of the Philippines on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments, signed on 23 August 1991, entered into force on 23 April 1999.
278
SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA, fn. 165, at [155].
279
Crawford, ‘Treaty and contract in investment arbitration’ (2008) 24 Arb Intl 351, at 366–367.
280
See, e.g., Strabag SE v Libya, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/15/1, Award, 29 June 2020, at [164] (declining to read into the
treaty a requirement that the state act in a sovereign capacity in order to trigger umbrella clause protection); Supervisión
y Control SA v Republic of Costa Rica, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/4, Award, 18 January 2017, at [287] (finding that
the treaty’s umbrella clause encompassed obligations entered into by a company controlled by the claimant); Gustav F
W Hamester, fn. 89, at [348] (declining to interpret the umbrella clause as encompassing obligations undertaken in a
contract entered into by an entity separate from the host state); EDF International and ors v Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/23, Award, IIC 556 (2012), at [939] (finding that concession agreements for specific investments
fell within the ambit of the umbrella clause); Bosh International, Inc. and B&P Ltd Foreign Investments Enterprise v
Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/11, Award, 25 October 2012, at [246] (finding that the umbrella clause did not cover
contractual undertakings made by a third party whose acts were not attributable to the host state).
281
Bureau Veritas, fn. 163, at [141]–[142], and [159].
282
SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA, fn. 96, at [162]–[171].
283
Yannaca-Small, ‘BIVAC BV v Paraguay versus SGS v Paraguay: The umbrella clause still in search of one
identity’ (2013) 28 ICSID Rev—FILJ 307, at 313.
284
Marboe, ‘Compensation in investment law and arbitration’, in Bjorklund, Laird, and Ripinsky (eds) Investment Treaty
Law: Current Issues III (British Institute of International and Comparative Law, 2009), pp. 29–32.
285
Ripinsky and Williams, Damages in International Investment Law (British Institute of International and Comparative
Law, 2008), p. 55, citing the ruling in Chorzów Factory that the state was under ‘the obligation to restore the undertaking
[that is, restitution] and, if this be not possible, to pay its value at the time of the indemnification [that is, compensation],
which value is designed to take the place of restitution which has become impossible’: see Case Concerning the Factory
at Chorzów (Claim for Indemnity) (Germany v Poland) [1928] PCIJ Series A No. 17, at 48.
286
Rumeli Telekom AS, fn. 234, at [147] (emphasis added); see also Tidewater Investment SRL and Tidewater Caribe CA v
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case no ARB/10/5, Decision on Annulment, 27 December 2016, at [192].
287
Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v United Republic of Tanzania, fn. 120, at [779].
288
Ibid., at [785], citing Crawford, The International Law Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility: Introduction, Text
and Commentaries (Cambridge University Press, 2002), pp. 204–205. The majority determined that although Tanzania
had violated the BIT, none of the violations caused the loss and damage in question: Biwater Gauff, fn. 120, at [797]–
[798]. The concurring and dissenting opinion, at [16]–[19], considered the majority’s analysis to confuse issues of
causation, on the one hand, and quantum of damages, on the other. Tanzania seized the claimant’s business, which clearly
caused injury to it. However, the claimant had failed to demonstrate damages, so the majority’s analytical confusion
was not decisive in the outcome.
289
Joseph Charles Lemire, fn. 220, at [157]. That a claimant could potentially recover against a respondent state on the
basis of a contract does not preclude the claimant for recovering damages for the state’s breach of the relevant BIT:
see, e.g., Deutsche Bank, fn. 85.
290
Hackworth, Digest of International Law, vol. 3 (Government Printing Office, 1942), p. 659.
291
Reprinted in Shihata, Legal Treatment of Foreign Investment: The World Bank Guidelines (Martinus Nijhoff, 1993),
p. 193.
292
Ripinsky and Williams, Damages in International Investment Law (British Institute of International and Comparative
Law, 2008), pp. 183–186, citing Black’s Law Dictionary.
293
Starrett Housing Corporation and ors v Islamic Republic of Iran, 16 IRAN-U.S. C.T.R., 112.
294
Ibid., at [18], [27], and [274]. See also Rusoro Mining Ltd., fn. 266 at [647].
295
World Bank Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment, s. IV(6).
296
See Phillips Petroleum Co. Iran, fn. 188, at [111]; see also Burlington Resources Inc., fn. 116, at [374].

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
24
297
The ‘beta’ measures the volatility of the particular industry vis-à-vis the stock market as a whole.
298
See Marboe, Calculation of Compensation and Damages in International Investment Law (2nd edn, Oxford University
Press, 2017), pp. 278–288.
299
Asian Agricultural Products Ltd (AAPL), fn. 15.
300
Phelps Dodge Corporation v Islamic Republic of Iran (1986) 10 Iran–US CTR 121.
301
Karaha Bodas Co. LLC v Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gasi Bumi Nehara, UNCITRAL, Award, 18 December
2000; Himpurna California Energy Ltd v PT PLN, UNCITRAL, 4 May 1999, both available at (2000) XXV YBCA 13.
302
Occidental Petroleum Corporation and ors v Republic of Ecuador, Award, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Award, 5 October
2012, at [707]–[708], [722], [733], and [737]–[738].
303
fn. 147, at [916].
304
Namely, the treaty standard described at paragraphs 8.81–8.96.
305
ADC Affiliate Ltd., fn. 185.
306
Ibid at [481]. See also Saipem SpA v People’s Republic of Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/07, Award, 30 June
2009, at [201]; ConocoPhillips Petrozuata BV and ors v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No ARB/07/30,
Award, 8 March 2019, at [211]–[227].
307
ADC Affiliate Ltd, fn. 185.
308
Case Concerning the Factory at Chorzów (Claim for Indemnity) (Germany v Poland) [1928] PCIJ Series A No. 17, at 47.
See Abdala and Spiller, ‘Chorzow’s standard rejuvenated: Assessing damages in investment treaty arbitrations’ (2008)
25 J Intl Arb 103.
309
Compañía de Aguas del Aconquija, fn. 114, at [8.2.5].
310
ADC Affiliate Ltd, fn. 185.
311
Ibid., at [496].
312
ConocoPhillips Petrozuata BV and ors v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision on
Jurisdiction and the Merits, 3 September 2013, at [343].
313
Waguih Elie George Siag, fn. 238, at [539]–[542]; Bernardus Henricus Funnekotter and ors v Republic of Zimbabwe,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/6, Award, 22 April 2009, at [124]; Marion Unglaube, fn. 238, at [305] and [307].
314
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Award, 6 May 2013, at [283], [286], and [288]. See also Nordzucker AG v Republic of Poland,
UNCITRAL, Third Partial and Final Award, 28 January 2009.
315
See fn. 220, at [163]. Ukraine objected that any such analysis would be inherently speculative.
316
MTD Equity Sdn Bhd, fn. 196; Petrobart Ltd v Kyrgyz Republic, SCC Arbitration No. 126/2003, Award, 29 March 2005;
Azurix Corporation, fn. 181; SD Myers Inc. v Government of Canada, UNCITRAL, Final Award, 30 December 2002;
Metalclad Corporation v United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award, 30 August 2000.
317
Reed and Bray, Fair and Equitable Treatment: Fairly and Equitably Applied In Lieu of Unlawful Indirect Expropriation?
(Brill, 2007); CMS Gas Transmission Co. v Argentine Republic, fn. 210; Enron Corporation, fn. 195; Azurix
Corporation, fn. 181; Saluka, fn. 196.
318
CMS Gas Transmission, fn. 210, at [410].
319
One possible measure of the value of a claimant’s investment in a company ‘but for’ the respondent state’s measures is
the actual price paid for the claimant’s shares: see EDF Internationa, fn. 280, at [1232].
320
Mr Franck Charles Arif v Republic of Moldova, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/23, Award, 8 April 2013.
321
Ibid., at [570].
322
Ibid., at [633].
323
The origins and developments of moral damages in international investment arbitration are addressed in Weber,
‘Demystifying moral damages in international investment arbitration’ (2020) 19 The Law and Practice of International
Courts and Tribunals 417–450. See also Dumberry, ‘Compensation for moral damages in investor-state arbitration
disputes’ (2010) 27(3) J Intl Arb 247 and Jagusch and Sebastian, ‘Moral damages in investment arbitration: Punitive
damages in compensatory clothing?’ (2013) 29 Arb Intl 45, at 45–46.
324
Desert Line, fn. 92. The previous case was SARL Benvenuti & Bonfant v People’s Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case
No. ARB/77/2, Award, 8 August 1980, (1982), which was decided ex aequo et bono rather than under a BIT.
325
Desert Line, fn. 92, at [289]–[290].
326
Joseph Charles Lemire, fn. 220, at [333]. The majority was sympathetic to the claimant’s claim that recurring rejections
of his applications had a negative impact on his entrepreneurial image, which would be likely to satisfy the second
requirement for moral damages. Nevertheless, the ‘gravity’ required under the moral damages standard was not present,
for Lemire’s situations could not be compared to the armed threats or witnessing of deaths for which other tribunals

Section D. - Merits of the Dispute, UKBC-REDFERN 530638653 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
25
have awarded moral damages: ibid., at [339]. The Lemire test has been adopted in other cases: see, e.g., Mr Franck
Charles Arif, fn. 320, at [584]–[592], and [615].
327
Güneş Tekstil Konfeksiyon Sanayi ve Ticaret Limited Şirketi and ors v Republic of Uzbekistan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/13/19, Award, 4 October 2019.
328
Crawford, State Responsibility: The General Part (Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 532–533.
329
Ibid., citing the International Law Commission’s Draft Articles of State Responsibility, Art. 38.
330
See Ripinsky and Williams, fn. 285, p. 362; Marboe, fn. 298, pp. 337–403; Sabahi, Compensation and Restitution
in Investor–State Arbitration: Principles and Practice (Oxford University Press, 2011), pp. 148–153. For a detailed
discussion of interest in international commercial arbitrations, see Chapter 9.
331
CME Czech Republic BV, fn. 163, at [636]–[641].
332
Compañía de Aguas del Aconquija, fn. 114, at [9.2.8].
333
Alpha Projektholding GmbH v Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/16, Award, 8 November 2010, at [514].
334
See Marboe, fn. 298, pp. 338–375. See generally Ripinsky and Williams, fn. 285, ch. 9.
335
Ioan Micula and ors v Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20, Decision on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 24 September
2008, at [1266].
336
Gemplus SA and ors v United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/3, Award, 16 June 2010; Bear Creek Mining
Corporation v Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/21, Award, 30 November 2017, at [714]–[716].
337
See, e.g., ICS Inspection and Control Services Ltd (United Kingdom) v Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, PCA Case
No. 2010-9, Award on Jurisdiction, at [340]; Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Co. v Republic of Ecuador,
UNCITRAL, Final Award, 31 August 2011, IIC 505 (2011), at [375]. For a detailed discussion of costs and fees in
international commercial arbitrations, see Chapter 9.
338
See, e.g., TECO Guatemala Holdings LLC v Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/17, Award, 19 December
2013, at [769]–[779] (ordering the Republic of Guatemala to reimburse 75 per cent of the claimant’s costs, amounting
to US$7.5 million); ConocoPhillips BV, fn. 306 at [1004].
339
Reed, ‘Allocation of costs in international arbitration’ (2011) 26 ICSID Rev—FILJ 76.
340
See Caron and Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (Oxford University Press, 2013), p. 867 (noting that the 1976
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 40.1 addressed the costs of legal representation and assistance but did not apply any default
principle to those costs).
341
See 2006 ICSID Rules, r. 28(1).
342
See ICSID Rules, r. 52.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
