Section F. - Differentiating the Institutions, UKBC-REDFERN 530638601 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section F. - Differentiating the Institutions
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Section F. - Differentiating the Institutions
1. 178
Arbitral institutions that administer international arbitrations are in competition with each other. For some commentators, this
should ensure that they strive to maintain high standards and stay ahead of the game—‘a race to the top’, as it has been
described. 136  It might also lead to increased involvement 137  by arbitral institutions in the conduct of arbitrations since they
will be judged on the speed and quality of awards made under their auspices.
1. 179
Given the large number of important arbitral institutions, it would be of limited use to seek to differentiate them in an introductory
chapter. Suffice to say that the leading institutions operating internationally (with their principal seat of operations) are:
 
• the ICC Court of Arbitration (Paris)
 
• the LCIA (London)
 
• the ICDR (New York)
 
• the SIAC (Singapore)
 
• the HKIAC (Hong Kong)
 
• ICSID (Washington DC) (for disputes between investors and states only)
These are all well-respected institutions with an excellent track record. The choice by the parties of a particular institution
will often depend on the location of the parties themselves, the place of the dispute, and the experience of counsel. As rule
revisions become ever more frequent, and institutions set up offices outside their seat of origin, 138  each institution is seeking to
differentiate itself and to take a greater share of the market for international arbitrations. An entire book could be dedicated to
the differences in the rules of these institutions. We simply note here that there is one institution that operates differently from
the others and therefore merits particular attention.
1. 180
The ICC has three distinguishing factors that are rarely replicated in other institutional rules. The first is the requirement for
‘Terms of Reference’ to be established by the tribunal and signed by the parties. 139  These set out the arbitral tribunal’s mission
in some detail after the initial exchange of introductory documents. They will contain a statement of the respective claims
(and any counterclaims) of the parties and a note of the amounts in dispute, together with a list of issues, unless (as frequently
happens) the tribunal considers that it is too early to draft such a list at the opening stage of the proceedings. It is against these
Terms of Reference that any eventual award will be measured. The concept of ‘Terms of Reference’ is a relic of the former
French Code of Civil Procedure, which discouraged arbitration of future disputes under an arbitration clause and insisted that
a special submission to arbitration, or compromis, had to be entered into by the parties after the dispute had arisen. 140  The
requirement for Terms of Reference has been retained by the ICC, even though the need for a compromis has been abolished.
Terms of Reference oblige the parties and the tribunal to focus on the issues in dispute at an early stage to establish a clear
platform for the future conduct of the case.
1. 181
The second distinguishing factor is the requirement for the tribunal to submit a draft version of its proposed award for scrutiny
and approval by the ICC Court. Article 34 of the ICC Rules, entitled ‘Scrutiny of Award by the Court’, states that the ICC Court
‘may lay down modifications as to the form of the award and, without affecting the tribunal’s liberty of decision, may also draw
its attention to points of substance’. In practice, the procedure is as follows:

Section F. - Differentiating the Institutions, UKBC-REDFERN 530638601 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(i)Counsel in charge of the case reviews the draft award and prepares a draft Report for the Court.
 
(ii)This draft Report is reviewed by the Management of the Secretariat and becomes the Secretariat’s Report.
 
(iii)The draft award is then formally scrutinised by the ICC Court at one of its weekly sessions, with the Court looking at
the draft award, Terms of Reference (if they exist), and the Secretariat’s Report.
 
(iv)For more complex cases involving states or state entities and/or with dissenting opinions, the draft award is scrutinised
at the Court’s extended committee where there is a report by a member of the Court in addition to the Secretariat’s Report.
 
(v)The ICC Court decide whether to approve the draft award or send it back to the tribunal.
 
(vi)If the draft award is sent back to the tribunal, it will have to be revised and the revised version will have to be re-
submitted and go through the same procedure.
1. 182
This careful scrutiny of awards is intended to add an extra imprimatur of quality to an ICC award with a correspondingly lower
risk of the award being challenged or set aside. Most other institutions engage in a less formal review of the final award to pick
up formatting and typographical errors, but do not seek to raise questions of substance with the tribunal.
1. 183
The third distinguishing factor is that the ICC (in common with other European arbitral institutions) will assess its own fees and
those of the tribunal on the ad valorem basis that has already been discussed, whilst other institutions adopt the more modern
time/cost approach.
Footnotes
136
By Professor Catherine Rogers, at https://arbitrationblog.kluwerarbitration.com/.
137
Or ‘intervention’ as the critics might say.
138
For example, the ICC has offices in New York, São Paulo, Singapore, and Abu Dhabi and the SIAC has offices in India,
China, and New York.
139
Terms of Reference are not needed in expedited procedures: ICC Rules, App. VI, Art. 3.
140
See Craig, Park, and Paulsson, International Chamber of Commerce Arbitration (3rd edn, Oceana, 2000), pp. 273–274.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
