Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 3 - Applicable Laws
Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate
(a) Introduction
3. 07
An appropriate place to start is the law governing the parties’ agreement to arbitrate. The chosen law is important, because it
establishes the rules and norms that will determine any dispute over the validity, scope, or interpretation of that agreement. The
following examples will illustrate this.
 
i.The law of the arbitration agreement will be relevant if there is a dispute over whether the tribunal’s jurisdiction extends
to a particular issue. For example, under English law, tort claims related to contractual performance will generally fall
within the scope of an arbitration agreement drafted appropriately, whereas under Russian law they may not.
 
ii.The law of the arbitration agreement will be relevant to determining whether the arbitration agreement extends to third
parties, such as the parent company of one of the parties.
 
iii.The law of the arbitration agreement will determine the validity of the arbitration agreement. Some national laws
may invalidate an arbitration agreement, in circumstances where others would find the same arbitration agreement to be
enforceable.
 
iv.The law of the arbitration agreement may also be relevant to deciding the applicable method of dispute resolution, where
the parties’ choice is not clearly set out, or where multiple methods are proposed in one arbitration agreement.
An agreement to arbitrate, as discussed in Chapter 2, may be set out in a purpose-made submission agreement or—as is the
case much more frequently—in an arbitration clause. Both submission agreements and arbitration clauses have been considered
in detail in the previous chapter.
3. 08
As to the law governing arbitration agreements, it might readily be assumed that this is the same law as that which the parties
chose to govern the substantive issues in dispute—that is to say, the law governing the broader contractual relationship between
the parties. Commercial parties may be less familiar with the possibility that multiple laws can cover different aspects of the
same contract, and so might reasonably be taken to have assumed that one law governs all the contractual terms, including the
agreement to arbitrate.
3. 09
However, given the well-established principle of the separability and autonomy of an arbitration agreement, it is by no means
certain that the parties intended that agreement to be treated just like any other agreement in the contract. Indeed, it is precisely
the separability of an arbitration agreement that gives credence to the possibility, at least in principle, that the law governing
the contract as a whole and the law governing the arbitration agreement might differ.
3. 10
Given the potential that exists for parties to argue, as a preliminary issue, about which law applies to an arbitration agreement,
the best course of action is for parties who are entering into an arbitration agreement to make clear what law is to apply to that
agreement. This can easily be done, for example by stating the chosen law in the arbitration clause itself. So long as the choice
of law is not contrary to public policy, parties are free to choose the law which is to govern their commercial relationship and
the law that is to govern their agreement to arbitrate, which may (if they wish) be a different law. However, if there is no express

Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
choice of law (a situation that arises more frequently than not 5 ), and it becomes necessary to determine the law applicable to
the agreement to arbitrate, the question that then arises is: how is a court or an arbitral tribunal to identify the relevant law?
3. 11
This is really two questions, because the answer may differ according to whether it is a court or tribunal that has to make the
decision. If it is a national court, that court will be expected to decide the question in accordance with its own rules of private
international law, which will usually contain binding rules to deal with the choice of law in cases involving a foreign element,
and will search for a solution in accordance with those rules. However, if the question is posed to an international arbitral
tribunal, the answer is less easy. As will be seen later in this chapter, it is often said that such a tribunal is not bound by any
formal ‘conflict of law’ rules and is free to apply the law that it considers to be appropriate.
(b) The applicable choice of law rules
3. 12
In deciding what law governs or is likely to govern an agreement to arbitrate, a good starting point is the New York Convention
of 1958. Article V(1)(a) does not deal directly with the point, but states that if there is a plea before a national court to the effect
that an arbitration agreement is invalid, it must be shown that it was invalid ‘under the law to which the parties have subjected
it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the country where the award was made’. What this means, in effect, is
that a national court should look first to the parties’ express agreement; and if there is no agreement should apply the law of
the seat, being the law of the country where the award was made. 6  (While Article V(1)(a) applies specifically in the context of
annulment or enforcement of awards, it would, arguably, be illogical to assume that different laws could apply to the validity
of a particular award, depending on the timing of the analysis. 7 )
3. 13
Given the wide acceptance of the New York Convention, we might expect to see conformity in the approach taken by courts in
different jurisdictions to the question of which law applies to an arbitration agreement; and we might also expect international
arbitral tribunals to do likewise, even if they are not bound to follow the same rules as national courts. At first glance, it might
appear that they do. As discussed in more detail below, national laws and arbitral rules usually accept the parties’ choice of
appliable law, and some arbitral institutions have a default rule that the law of the seat applies in the absence of the parties’ choice.
On closer inspection, however, there are significant divergences in the specific approaches taken across different jurisdictions.
3. 14
Take the national laws of the United Kingdom, France, and the People’s Republic of China, for example.
 
i.English common law looks in the first instance for the parties’ express or implied choice of applicable law by reference
to principles of English contract law, which establish a presumption that the law applicable to the contract as a whole also
applies to the arbitration agreement. 8  Where there is no applicable law clause, an English court will identify the system of
law to which the arbitration agreement is ‘most closely connected’—a test that, in the absence of strong indications to the
contrary, assumes that the ‘most closely connected’ law is that stipulated by the parties to be the seat of the arbitration. 9
 
ii.French law defers to the express choice of the parties and, in the absence of an express choice, will consider the parties’
implied choice. However, unlike English law, in doing so, emphasis is placed on the autonomy of the arbitration agreement,
its legal independence from the main contract that contains it, and the absence of any need to refer to a particular national
law in seeking to ascertain and respect the intention of the parties. 10
 
iii.Mainland Chinese law looks first for any expressly stated choice by the parties, but, in the absence of any express choice
—and unlike English or French law—there is no search for the parties’ implied choice. Instead, a court will apply the law
of the seat of the arbitration, or, if even that is not stipulated, the law of the place of the relevant arbitral institution. 11
3. 15

Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
This lack of uniformity among major arbitral jurisdictions can have practical repercussions. The case of Kabab-Ji v Kout Food
Group is illustrative. The relevant arbitration clause was found in a series of franchise agreements governed by English law
and seated in Paris and concluded between a Kuwaiti company, Al Homaizi Foodstuff Company, and a Lebanese company,
Kabab-Ji SAL. Al Homaizi was subsequently part of a restructuring that led to the formation of a holding company, Kout Food
Group (KFG). A dispute arose under the agreements, and Kabab-Ji initiated arbitration ICC arbitration proceedings against
KFG in France. While KFG participated in the arbitration, it contended that it was not a party to the franchise agreements or
the arbitration agreements contained in them. This in turn required the tribunal to interpret the arbitration agreement and, in
particular, to determine the applicable law. The tribunal found that French law, as the law of the seat, applied to the arbitration
agreement and concluded that, under French law, KFG was a party to the arbitration agreements. The tribunal went on to
conclude that KFG was in breach of the franchise agreements and awarded damages against the company of around US$6.7
million. 12
3. 16
KFG brought an action in the French courts to annul the award on the grounds that it was not a party to the franchise agreements
and not bound by the arbitration agreements. Meanwhile, Kabab-Ji brought enforcement proceedings in England. The Paris
Court of Appeal dismissed the annulment action, finding that the arbitration agreement was governed by French law. 13  The
English courts reached a different conclusion, finding that the parties’ choice of substantive law of their contract, English law,
also governed their arbitration agreement. 14  In the view of the English courts, under English law, KFG was not a party to the
franchise agreements and not in breach of the franchise agreement.
3. 17
This dichotomy between, on the one hand, jurisdictions applying to the arbitration agreement the substantive law of the contract
and, on the other hand, jurisdictions applying the law of the seat, and the various rationales for doing so, is the theme to which
we turn next.
(c) The law of the contract as the applicable law of the arbitration
agreement
(i) The commercial intent of the parties
3. 18
As we have already said, it is not unreasonable to ask why, if the parties have expressly chosen a particular law to govern
their contract, some other system of law, which the parties have not expressly chosen, should be applied to one of the clauses
in that contract, simply because it happens to be an arbitration clause? It might be thought that a better approach would be
to assume that an express choice of law by commercial parties was intended to cover all the clauses of the contract. Such an
approach would provide the parties with certainty that their ‘applicable law’ clause would be effective in relation to all the
contractual rights and obligations. It would also help to ensure consistency in the interpretation of the parties’ contract as a
whole. Thus, it seems reasonable to say, as Professor Lew has said, that:
There is a very strong presumption in favour of the law governing the substantive agreement which contains
the arbitration clause also governing the arbitration agreement. This principle has been followed in many cases.
This could even be implied as an agreement of the parties as to the law applicable to the arbitration clause. 15
A French commentator has offered a similar view:
The autonomy of the arbitration clause and of the principal contract does not mean that they are totally
independent one from the other, as evidenced by the fact that acceptance of the contract entails acceptance of
the clause, without any other formality. 16

Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
The UK Supreme Court has held similarly in relation to circumstances where a contract contains a governing law clause,
as well as an arbitration clause:
[I]t is natural to interpret such a governing law clause, in the absence of good reason to the contrary, as applying
to the arbitration clause, for the simple reason that the arbitration clause is part of the contract which the parties
have agreed is to be governed by the specified system of law. 17
3. 19
Enka v Chubb is now the leading authority on the approach taken under English law to ascertain the law of the arbitration
agreement. Given its prominence as an authority on the common law relating to this topic, it is worth discussing in more detail.
3. 20
The underlying dispute concerned a contract under which Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS (Enka) was to perform works at a power
plant in Russia. A Russian company, CJSC Energoproekt, was responsible for the design and construction of the power plant
and entered into a subcontract for certain works with Enka. Energoproekt later transferred its rights and obligations under the
contract to PSJC Unipro, the owner of the power station. Chubb Russia provided insurance to the owner of Unipro. After a
fire caused significant damage to the plant, and Chubb Russia paid out approximately US$400 million, Chubb Russia became
subrogated to Unipro’s rights to claim compensation from third parties for damage caused by the fire. The contract contained
an arbitration clause which provided for disputes to be resolved by arbitration in London under the ICC Rules. Chubb Russia
filed a tort claim in the Moscow Arbitrazh Court against Enka (and others), claiming for the damage caused by the fire.
Enka, in turn, sought an anti-suit injunction from the English High Court, to restrain Chubb Russia from further pursuing the
Russian proceedings against Enka on the ground that this was in breach of the arbitration agreement. The question arose as
to which law applied to the parties’ arbitration agreement: under English law, Chubb’s tort claim would fall within the scope
of the arbitration clause, but under Russian law it would not.
3. 21
The High Court rejected Enka’s application on the grounds that the most appropriate forum to decide whether the claim fell
within the arbitration agreement was the Moscow Arbitrazh Court. This finding was overturned on appeal, and the Court of
Appeal issued an anti-suit injunction restraining Chubb from continuing the Russian proceedings. In doing so, it found that
there was a strong presumption that the parties had impliedly chosen the law of the seat of the arbitration as the law that
governed the agreement to arbitrate. 18  Accordingly, there being no express substantive choice of the law and the place of
arbitration having been chosen as London, the arbitration agreement was considered by the Court of Appeal to be governed
by English law.
3. 22
The UK Supreme Court disagreed with the reasoning of the Court of Appeal but (by a majority) not with their conclusion.
Clarifying the position under English common law, the Supreme Court unanimously held that where the parties have made a
choice of the law that is to govern their contract, this choice would generally be construed as a choice of the law governing the
arbitration agreement as well, unless there was a good reason to conclude otherwise. 19  Where, as in the case before it, there
was no express choice of law, the court had to decide what law governed the arbitration agreement. In these circumstances,
and contrary to the position taken by the Court of Appeal, the Supreme Court held that there was no presumption that by
choosing a seat of arbitration the parties had impliedly chosen the law of that seat to govern the arbitration agreement. 20
What the court had to do, in the absence of any express choice of law, was to look for the law with which the arbitration
agreement had ‘the closest and most real connection’. This, according to the majority of the Court, was ‘the law of the country
of the seat, being the place where the arbitration is to be held and which will exercise a supervisory jurisdiction necessary
to ensure that the procedure is effective’. 21
3. 23
The presumption that the governing law of a contract applies also to its arbitration agreement is made in other jurisdictions.
For example, in BCY v BCZ, the Singapore High Court considered the law applicable to a sale and purchase agreement
governing the sale of shares of BCY’s company to BCZ and a co-purchaser. When BCY decided not to proceed with the

Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
sale of the shares, BCZ commenced arbitration. One of the issues in dispute was the existence of an agreement to arbitrate,
which would have designated Singapore as the place of arbitration. The arbitrator found there to be a rebuttable presumption
that the law of the contract, New York law, governed the arbitration agreement, and that there were no factors displacing that
presumption in this instance. 22  Applying New York law, the arbitrator found that the parties’ words and conduct established
an agreement to arbitrate.
3. 24
BCY sought declaratory relief in the Singaporean courts, asserting that the arbitrator had no jurisdiction to hear the claim.
That, in turn, required the Singaporean courts to confirm the law governing the arbitration agreement. In doing so, the High
Court clarified the choice-of-law approach in Singapore:
Where the arbitration agreement is a clause forming part of a main contract, it is reasonable to assume that the
contracting parties intend their entire relationship to be governed by the same system of law. If the intention is
otherwise, I do not think it is unreasonable to expect the parties to specifically provide for a different system of
law to govern the arbitration agreement. In practice, parties rarely specify the law applicable to the arbitration
agreement as distinct from the main contract [ … ] When a choice of law (such as the one here) stipulates that
the ‘agreement’ is to be governed by one country’s system of law, the natural inference should be that parties
intend the express choice of law to ‘govern and determine the construction of all the clauses in the agreement
which they signed, including the arbitration agreement’ [ … ] To say that the word ‘agreement’ contemplates
all the clauses in the main contract save for the arbitration clause would in fact be inconsistent with its ordinary
meaning. 23
The High Court proceeded to apply New York law, under which, in its view, there was in fact no agreement to be bound
by the arbitration clause. 24
(ii) Potential conflict with the autonomy of an arbitration clause
3. 25
A conceptual difficulty in applying the law of the contract to all terms of the contract is that it arguably runs into conflict
with the ‘autonomy’ of the arbitration clause. As we have previously stated, an arbitration clause is taken to be autonomous
and to be separable from other clauses in the agreement. 25  If necessary, it may stand alone. In this respect, it is comparable
to a submission agreement. Even if it is presently not customary to find a clause in a commercial agreement which expressly
specifies the law applicable to the arbitration clause in that contract, it is common for parties to agree on the seat of an
arbitration, and this seat may well have its own distinct set of norms, which apply solely to arbitration clauses and not to
the rest of a contract. 26  Even those jurisdictions that apply a presumption that the contract and its arbitration agreement
are governed by the same law recognise that this is not always the case. The separability of an arbitration clause therefore
supports the argument that it is possible for it to be governed by a different law from that which governs the main agreement.
3. 26
As noted above, the New York Convention points towards this conclusion. 27  In the provisions relating to enforcement, the
Convention stipulates that the agreement under which the award is made must be valid ‘under the law to which the parties
have subjected it’, or, failing any indication thereon, ‘under the law of the country where the award was made’ (which will
be the law of the seat of the arbitration).

Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
(d) Law of the seat of the arbitration
(i) The autonomy of an arbitration agreement
3. 27
In those jurisdictions that search for what the parties have impliedly selected, there is division over the emphasis placed on
the autonomy of the arbitration agreement. In Enka v Chubb, the UK Supreme Court rejected the proposition that the parties
could be taken to have selected a governing law of the contract as a whole on the sole basis of their choice of an arbitral seat
and found that, in the same way, the law of the seat did not necessarily imply a choice of law of the arbitration agreement. 28
But that is a view not universally held. As two commentators note:
[T]he consequence of choosing a seat is that many aspects of the arbitration agreement—and not merely the
arbitration procedure—will be governed by the law of the seat in any event, regardless of which law applies to
the matrix contract. [ … ] In circumstances where many aspects of the arbitration agreement will in any event be
governed by the law of the seat in this way, the natural inference is that the parties, by choosing a seat, intended
the entirety of that agreement (i.e. the arbitration, not the matrix contract) to be governed by that law. 29
3. 28
Likewise, in Kabab-Ji (Lebanon) v Kout Food Group (Kuwait), the Paris Court of Appeal applied French rules of international
arbitration law to identify the ‘common will of the parties’ in the absence of an express choice of law to govern an arbitration
agreement. In that case, the parties had agreed a series of franchise agreements governed by English law with arbitration seated
in Paris. The Paris Court of Appeal found that the parties had intended to apply French law to their arbitration agreement, in
light of their choice of an arbitral seat. 30  The court found further that, given the autonomy of an arbitration clause, it was
not possible to infer that the parties intended English law—the law of the contract—to apply. 31
(ii) The requirements of the law of the seat
3. 29
There is also a possibility that the law of the seat itself stipulates that it is to be applied as the law governing the arbitration
agreement. Again, in these instances, it might be said that the choice of the law of the seat reflects the parties’ implied choice
of the law of the arbitration agreement.
3. 30
There are institutional and national laws providing that, where applicable as the law of the seat, the same national law will
govern the arbitration agreement, absent agreement between the parties to the contrary. For example, the LCIA rules apply
the law of the seat of the arbitration, absent the parties’ express agreement to the contrary:
[T]he law applicable to the Arbitration Agreement and the arbitration shall be the law applicable at the seat of
the arbitration, unless and to the extent that the parties have agreed in writing on the application of other laws
or rules of law and such agreement is not prohibited by the law applicable at the arbitral seat. 32
3. 31
In the Bulbank case, 33  the Supreme Court of Sweden confirmed that Swedish courts would look to the parties’ express
choice, absent which the Swedish Arbitration Act provides that the law of the seat will apply to the arbitration agreement. 34
The case concerned a contract governed by Austrian law, which provided for arbitration seated in Stockholm. In ascertaining

Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
the law applicable to the arbitration agreement, the court placed no reliance on the parties’ substantive choice-of-law clause,
finding instead that Swedish law governed the arbitration:
[N]o particular provision concerning the applicable law for the arbitration agreement itself was indicated [by
the parties]. In such circumstances the issue of the validity of the arbitration clause should be determined in
accordance with the law of the state in which the arbitration proceedings have taken place, that is to say, Swedish
law. 35
3. 32
In similar fashion, the law of Scotland provides that where parties have agreed to seat their arbitration in Scotland, but have
failed to specify the law governing an arbitration, the arbitration agreement is to be governed by Scottish law. 36  The position
is the same under Turkish law. 37  The US FAA also operates in this way with respect to arbitrations seated in the United States.
The FAA supplies substantive legal rules for any written arbitration agreement that involves inter-state or foreign commerce
or that falls within the US courts’ admiralty jurisdiction (excluding in the context of employment contracts). For a US-seated
arbitration, the FAA thus constitutes part of the law governing the arbitration agreement and pre-empts any conflicting rules
of the state, or possibly also foreign law, that otherwise applies to the agreement. 38
(iii) The law of the seat as a means to avoid invalidity
3. 33
The parties’ implied choice of law to govern their arbitration agreement might also be the law of the seat, where the law of
the contract as a whole would otherwise invalidate the parties’ agreement to arbitrate. As the UK Supreme Court has stated:
The principle that contracting parties could not reasonably have intended a significant clause in their contract,
such as an arbitration clause, to be invalid is a form of purposive interpretation, which seeks to interpret the
language of the contract, so far as possible, in a way which will give effect to—rather than defeat—an aim or
purpose which the parties can be taken to have had in view. 39
3. 34
Hamlyn v Talisker is an early but authoritative example in English law. 40  The case concerned a contract between an English
company and a Scottish company, to be performed in Scotland, and provided that disputes would be resolved by arbitration
using two members of the London Corn Exchange. The parties’ arbitration agreement was valid under English law but not
under Scottish law, which required arbitrators to be named. The House of Lords reversed the finding of the Court of Session
that the law of the contract as a whole was Scottish law and that the arbitration agreement was invalid. Instead, the House of
Lords determined that English law applied to the arbitration agreement, for the following reasons:
[T]he contract with reference to arbitration would have been absolutely null and voice if it were to be governed
by the law of Scotland. That cannot have been the intent of the parties; it is not reasonable to attribute that
intention to them if the contract may be otherwise construed [ … ] 41
and because:
It is more reasonable to hold that the parties contracted with the common intention of giving entire effect to
every clause rather than of mutilating or destroying one of the most important provisions. 42
3. 35
More recently, in Sulamérica Cia Nacional de Seguros SA and ors v Enesa Engenharia SA and ors, 43  the English courts
were required to consider a contract governed by Brazilian law containing an arbitration agreement that designated London

Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
as the seat of any arbitration, without any express choice of law governing the arbitration agreement itself. Under Brazilian
law, the arbitration agreement would have been unenforceable, without the consent of the respondent party to submit the
specific dispute to arbitration. The Court of Appeal found that the parties could not have intended to apply Brazilian law:
I do not think that in this case the parties’ express choice of Brazilian law to govern the substantive contract is
sufficient evidence of an implied choice of Brazilian law to govern the arbitration agreement, because (if the
insured are correct) there is at least a serious risk that a choice of Brazilian law would significantly undermine
that agreement. [ … ] this, it seems to me, reflects the fact that although one may start from the assumption
that the parties intended the same law to govern the whole of the contract, including the arbitration agreement,
specific factors may lead to the conclusion that that cannot in fact have been their intention. 44
On this basis, the court determined that there was no express or implied agreement between the parties as to the law of the
arbitration agreement, and it was necessary for the court to fill the lacuna.
(e) Delocalisation—a French ‘third way’
3. 36
The solutions considered so far have focused on establishing the law governing the arbitration agreement by reference to a
national law, whether it is the law of the contract or the law of the seat of arbitration. The French courts, however, have adopted
a different approach, whereby the existence and scope of the arbitration agreement is determined exclusively by reference to
the parties’ discernible common intentions. In this way, the arbitration agreement remains independent of the various national
laws that might, in other jurisdictions, be deemed to apply to it. This approach, which fundamentally envisages international
arbitration as a truly autonomous system, has the advantage of avoiding the need to have regard to the particular, local ‘conflict-
of-law’ rules developed by different states around the globe. It seeks instead to implement what the court or tribunal finds to
be the common intention of the parties.
3. 37
This French ‘third way’ was a result of a number of decisions by the Paris Court of Appeal, from the early 1970s through to
the early 1990s, which culminated in the Court of Cassation’s decision in Dalico in 1993: 45
[B]y virtue of a substantive rule of international arbitration, the arbitration agreement is legally independent of
the main contract containing or referring to it, and the existence and effectiveness of the arbitration agreement are
to be assessed, subject to the mandatory rules of French law and international public policy, on the basis of the
parties’ common intention, there being no need to refer to any national law. 46
3. 38
In this context, the reference to the legal independence of the arbitration agreement is a reference to the doctrine of separability
of the arbitration agreement, which has already been discussed, and which leads to the arbitration agreement being regarded as
being itself autonomous. 47  The French Supreme Court stopped short of a complete delocalisation of the arbitration agreement,
by subjecting it to the mandatory provisions of French law and international public policy. 48  Moreover, it remains open to the
parties, if such is their common intention, to expressly designate a national legal system or set of conflict laws, as the French
Supreme Court clarified in the Uni-Kod decision. 49
3. 39
The French approach was examined by the UK Supreme Court in its decision in Dallah Real Estate and Tourism Holding Co. v
Ministry of Religious Affairs, Government of Pakistan. 50  The decision concerned an agreement between Dallah Real Estate and
a Pakistani government trust relating to commercial services for pilgrimages to Saudi Arabia. The agreement included an ICC
arbitration clause, with the seat of the arbitration in Paris. Dallah initiated arbitration proceedings against both the government
of Pakistan and against the trust. The arbitral tribunal in Paris accepted jurisdiction over Pakistan and rendered an award in

Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
favour of Dallah. The award itself was challenged in Paris, the seat of the arbitration; and its enforcement was challenged in
the United Kingdom on the basis (among other things) that the tribunal had no jurisdiction over Pakistan, which was not a
signatory to the agreement. The UK Supreme Court, applying French law, accepted that, as a starting point, French law (the
law of the seat) refers to supranational law:
[Under French law,] arbitration agreements derive their existence, validity and effect from supra-national law,
without it being necessary to refer to any national law. If so, that would not avoid the need to have regard to French
law ‘as the law of the country where the award was made’ under Article V(1)(a) of the [New York] Convention
and s. 103(2)(b) of the 1996 [English Arbitration] Act. The Cour de Cassation is, however, a national court, giving
a French legal view of international arbitration; and Dallah and the Government agree that the true analysis is that
French law recognises transnational principles as potentially applicable to determine the existence, validity and
effectiveness of an international arbitration agreement, such principles being part of French law. 51
(f) Combining several approaches—a Swiss model
3. 40
The final approach to determining the law or rules applicable to an arbitration agreement is to combine several approaches, as
is the case in Switzerland, under the Swiss PIL which provides:
As regards its substance, the arbitration agreement shall be valid if it conforms either to the law chosen by
the parties, or to the law governing the subject-matter of the dispute, in particular the law governing the main
contract, or if it conforms to Swiss law.
3. 41
This formulation has the advantage of giving Swiss courts a very considerable opportunity to uphold the validity of an arbitration
agreement.
Footnotes
5
The UK Supreme Court has observed that ‘[i]t is rare for the law governing an arbitration clause to be specifically
identified (either in the arbitration clause itself or elsewhere in the contract)’. See Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v OOO
Insurance Company Chubb [2020] UKSC 38, at [43].
6
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(a). See also Collins (ed.) Dicey, Morris & Collins on the Conflict of Laws (15th edn,
Sweet & Maxwell, 2018), paragraph 16-014 (‘In the light of the pervasive reach of the New York Convention in modern
times, this rule, although not itself prescribing a choice of law rule of general application, nevertheless provides a strong
indication of one [ … ].’)
7
This is a view shared by Professor Albert Jan van den Berg in his pre-eminent text, The New York Arbitration Convention
of 1958 (Kluwer Law International, 1981), pp. 126–127 (‘A systematic interpretation of the Convention, in principle,
permits the application by analogy of the conflict rules of article V(1)(a) to the enforcement of the agreement. It would
appear inconsistent at the time of the enforcement of the award to apply the Convention’s uniform conflict rules and at
the time of the enforcement of the agreement to apply possibly different conflict rules of the forum.’)
8
As articulated most recently by the UK Supreme Court in Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v OOO Insurance Company Chubb
[2020] UKSC 38, at [170(iv)].
9
Ibid., at [193(iv)].
10
As stated most recently by the Paris Court of Appeal in Kabab-Ji (Lebanon) v Kout Food Group (Kuwait), cour d’appel
de Paris, Pôle 1—chambre 1, 23 June 2020, Case No. 17/22943), pp. 5, 8 (‘[e]n vertu d’une règle matérielle du droit

Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
international de l’arbitrage, la clause compromissoire est indépendante juridiquement du contrat principal qui la contient
directement ou par référence, et son existence et son efficacité s’apprécient, sous réserve des règles impératives du droit
français et de l’ordre public international, d’après la commune volonté des parties, sans qu’il soit nécessaire de se référer
à une loi étatique’).
11
Interpretation of the SPC Concerning Some Issues on Application of the Arbitration Law 2006, as modified by the Law
of the People’s Republic of China on the Law Applicable to Foreign-Related Civil Relationships 2010, Art. 16.
12
The arbitration and the findings of the tribunal are described by the UK Supreme Court in Kabab-Ji SAL v Kout Food
Group [2021] UKSC 48, at [5]–[6].
13
Kabab-Ji (Lebanon) v Kout Food Group (Kuwait), cour d’appel de Paris, Pôle 1—chambre 1, 23 June 2020, Case No.
17/22943). At the time of writing, the appeal before the Court of Cassation is pending.
14
Kabab-Ji SAL v Kout Food Group [2021] UKSC 48, at [39].
15
Lew, ‘The law applicable to the form and substance of the arbitration clause’ (1999) 9 ICCA Congress Series 114, at
143 (emphasis added). Other leading commentaries have expressed similar views. See Merkin, ‘Arbitration Law’, Issue
84 (Informa Subscriptions, 2020), paragraph 7.12 (‘[E]ven if there is no express contractual statement to that effect,
a choice-of-law clause for the entire agreement is likely to be construed as extending to the arbitration clause. There
are numerous decisions to this effect [ … ] However, that presumption may be ousted in appropriate circumstances
[ … ]’); Collins (ed.) Dicey, Morris & Collins on the Conflict of Laws (15th edn, Sweet & Maxwell, 2018), paragraph
16-017 (‘If there is an express choice of law to govern the contract as a whole, the arbitration agreement may also be
governed by that law’).
16
Derains, ‘The ICC arbitral process, Part VIII: Choice of law applicable to the contract and international
arbitration’ (2006) 6 ICC International Court of Arbitration Bulletin 10, at 16–17.
17
Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v OOO Insurance Company Chubb [2020] UKSC 38, at [43], citing the sixth edition of this
book, paragraph 3.12.
18
Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi A.S. v OOO Insurance Company Chubb [2020] EWCA Civ 574, at [91].
19
Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v OOO Insurance Company Chubb [2020] UKSC 38, at [43].
20
Ibid., at [66] and [94].
21
Ibid., [101(6)]. The two dissenting judges would have regarded the choice of the seat as being tantamount to a choice
of the law of that seat as the law governing the arbitration agreement.
22
The arbitration is discussed in the court’s judgment. See BCY v BCZ [2016] SGHC 249, at 3233.
23
BCY v BCZ [2016] SGHC 249, at 59 (emphasis in original).
24
Ibid., at 97. The Singapore Court of Appeal reached a similar conclusion in BNA v BNB and BNC [2019] SGCA 84.
25
Separability is discussed in Chapter 2. See Fiona Trust & Holding Corporation and ors v Privalov and ors [2007]
EWCA Civ 20; Fili Shipping Co. Ltd v Premium Nafta Products Ltd [2007] UKHL 40 (on appeal from Fiona Trust).
26
The law governing the arbitration, including the law of the seat of an arbitration, is discussed further below at paragraphs
3.42ff.
27
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(a). There is a similar provision in Model Law, Art. 34(2)(a). See discussion above
at paragraph 3.12.
28
Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v OOO Insurance Company Chubb [2020] UKSC 38, at [116]–[117].
29
Glick and Venkatesan, ‘Choosing the law governing the arbitration agreement’, in Kaplan and Moser (eds) Jurisdiction,
Admissibility and Choice of Law in International Arbitration: Liber Amicorum Michael Pryles (Kluwer Law
International, 2018), ch. 9, at pp. 142–143.
30
Kabab-Ji (Lebanon) v Kout Food Group (Kuwait), cour d’appel de Paris, Pôle 1 chambre 1, 23 June 2020, Case No.
17/22943), p. 29.
31
Ibid., p. 27. Under Malaysian conflict-of-law rules, in the absence of an express choice of law to govern the law of
the arbitration agreement, the designation of a seat of the arbitration is a tacit designation of the law governing the
arbitration agreement. See Thai-Lao Lignite Co Ltd and Anor v Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
6 AMR 219 (2017), at 244.
32
LCIA Rules 2020, Art. 16.4. See also Art. 16.5 (‘Notwithstanding Article 16.4, the LCIA Rules shall be interpreted in
accordance with the laws of England.’)
33
Bulgarian Foreign Trade Bank Ltd v Al Trade Finance Inc., Case No. T1881–99, Swedish Supreme Court, 27 October
2000, (2001) XXVI YBCA 291.
34
Swedish Arbitration Act, s. 48.
35
Bulgarian Foreign Trade Bank Ltd v Al Trade Finance Inc., Case No. T1881–99, Swedish Supreme Court, 27 October
2000, (2001) XXVI YBCA 291, p. 293.

Section B. - Law Governing the Agreement to Arbitrate, UKBC-REDFERN 530638616...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
36
Arbitration (Scotland) Act 2010, s. 6 (‘Where—(a) the parties to an arbitration agreement agree that an arbitration under
that agreement is to be seated in Scotland, but (b) the arbitration agreement does not specify the law which is to govern
it, then, unless the parties otherwise agree, the arbitration agreement is to be governed by Scots law’).
37
Turkish International Arbitration Law 2001, Art. 4 (‘The validity of an arbitration agreement is governed by the law
selected by the parties to be applicable to the arbitration agreement, or failing any choice, by Turkish law’).
38
See, e.g., Kindred Nursing Centers Limited Partnership v Clark, 137 S.Ct. 1421, 1426–1429 (2017) (holding a rule
of Kentucky law that disallowed an agent acting under a general power of attorney from entering into an arbitration
agreement unless the power of attorney specifically empowered the agent to waive the principal’s right to trial by jury
to be pre-empted by the FAA); Marmet Health Care Center, Inc v Brown, 565 US 530, 532–533 (2012) (per curiam)
(holding a rule of West Virginia law which rendered unenforceable any pre-dispute arbitration agreement insofar as it
covered personal injury and wrongful death claims to be pre-empted by the FAA); AT&T Mobility LLC v Concepcion,
563 US 333, 344–352 (2011) (holding a rule of California law which deemed unconscionable an arbitration agreement
barring a class arbitration in a consumer contract of adhesion to be pre-empted by the FAA); see also Moses H. Cone
Memorial Hospital v Mercury Construction Corp, 460 US 1, 25 n. 32 (1983) (‘The effect of [the FAA, s. 2] is to create a
body of federal substantive law of arbitrability, applicable to any arbitration agreement within the coverage of the Act’);
Pedcor Mgt Co, Inc Welfare Benefit Plan v Nations Personnel of Texas, Inc. 343 F 3d 355 (5th Cir. 2003), 363 (‘[I]t is
well established that the FAA pre-empts state laws that contradict the purpose of the FAA by “requiring a judicial forum
for the resolution of claims which the contracting parties agreed to resolve by arbitration”’).
39
Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v OOO Insurance Company Chubb [2020] UKSC 38, [106].
40
Hamlyn & Co v Talisker Distillery [1894] AC 202.
41
Ibid., p. 208 (per Lord Herschell).
42
Hamlyn & Co v Talisker Distillery [1894] AC 202, p. 215 (per Lord Ashbourne).
43
Sulamérica Cia Nacional de Seguros SA and ors v Enesa Engenharia SA and ors [2012] EWCA Civ 638.
44
Ibid., at [31].
45
Municipalité de Khoms El Mergeb c/Sté Dalico, Cass. Civ. 1ere, 20 December 1993, [1994] Rev Arb 116. The case was
brought by a Libyan municipal authority against a Danish contractor after the latter had initiated arbitration proceedings.
The Libyan party argued that the arbitration agreement was governed by Libyan law and that it was invalid under Libyan
law. The Paris Court of Appeal rejected these arguments without deciding what law applied.
46
Municipalité de Khoms El Mergeb c/Sté Dalico, Cass. Civ. 1ere, 20 December 1993, [1994] Rev Arb 116, p. 117, as
translated by Professor Gaillard in Savage and Gaillard (eds) Fouchard, Gaillard, Goldman on International Commercial
Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 1999), p. 437.
47
Professor Gaillard refers to the ‘dual meaning’ of ‘autonomy’ in Savage and Gaillard (eds) Fouchard, Gaillard, Goldman
on International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 1999), p. 388. See also ibid., pp. 420–421 and
pp. 435–451, and in particular p. 441 for an endorsement of the French third way. Regarding the separability of the
arbitration agreement from the main contract under French law, see Sté Omenex c/Hugon, Cass. Civ. 1ère, [2006] Rev
Arb 103, in which the court held that an arbitration agreement survives the invalidity of the underlying agreement.
48
Lew, Mistelis, and Kröll, Comparative International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2003),
paragraph 6–66.
49
Uni-Kod c/Sté Ouralkali, Cass. Civ. 1ere, 30 March 2004, [2005] Rev Arb 959.
50
Dallah Real Estate and Tourism Holding Co. v Ministry of Religious Affairs, Government of Pakistan [2010] UKSC 4.
51
Dallah Real Estate and Tourism Holding Co. v Ministry of Religious Affairs, Government of Pakistan [2010] UKSC 4,
at [15]. A few months later, the Paris Court of Appeal, in Gouvernement du Pakistan—Ministère des Affaires Religieuses
v Dallah Real Estate and Tourism Holding Co., Case No. 09/28533, 17 February 2011, reached a different conclusion
as to whether Pakistan, as a non-signatory to the contract, was bound by the arbitration clause.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
