(1)—The Tribunal, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406890 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
(1)—The Tribunal
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
(1)—The Tribunal
22-6
Article 22(1) imposes an obligation on the Tribunal to conduct the arbitration in an expeditious and cost-effective manner. At
the outset of the proceedings for proceedings not subject to the Expedited Procedure Provisions, that obligation ties in with the
Tribunal’s obligation under art.23 to seek to finalise the Terms of Reference within 30 days after transmittal of the file to the
Tribunal; to conduct the initial case management conference and to establish the procedural timetable as provided for in art.24;
and to establish the facts of the case within as short a time as possible in accordance with art.25. Under the Expedited Procedure
Provisions, the obligation relates to convening the case management conference within 15 days after transmittal of the file to
the Tribunal and issuing an award within six months after the date of the case management conference. During the course of
the arbitration, the Tribunal should comply with the periods set out in the Procedural Timetable. After the arbitration has been
completed, the Tribunal should close the proceedings in accordance with art.27, conduct deliberations and finalise the award
within two months thereafter (for sole arbitrators) and three months thereafter for three-person Tribunals.
22-7
Non-compliance with art.22(1) could lead, in extreme cases, to replacement under art.15(2) 190  and perhaps to a challenge
under art.14. In any event, if the ICC Court determines that a Tribunal has failed to meet the requirements of art.22(1) it could
well affect the amount that the Tribunal is paid with respect to the arbitration. 191  However, the main purpose of art.22(1) is to
focus the Tribunal and the parties on the need for expeditious and cost-effective conduct of the arbitration. Article 22(1), like
s.33(b) of the English Arbitration Act, sets out a principle that in many cases is difficult to enforce given the Tribunal’s role
with respect to conduct of the proceedings.
22-8
The Secretariat follows the arbitral proceedings generally and in particular with respect to the signing of the Terms of Reference
and the preparation of the Procedural Timetable. On an ongoing basis, the ICC Court reviews the status of each arbitration when
it decides to approve the period for the extension of an award under art.31(1). In addition, the Secretariat monitors whether the
proceedings have been closed under art.27.
22-9
There is in some instances a difference of opinion between the Tribunal and the parties as to what would constitute an expeditious
and cost-effective procedure for the arbitration. Since the Tribunal is required to respect the parties’ agreement as to the
procedure within the bounds of the Rules under art.19, then, in the authors’ view, the parties’ agreement should prevail. However,
the Tribunal may, and should, make proposals for expeditious and cost-effective conduct of the arbitration.
Footnotes
190
See the discussion under art.15(2) at para.15-21 and following.
191
See the discussion under art.38(2).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
