Tribunal’s decision as to the language(s) of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406874...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Tribunal’s decision as to the language(s) of the arbitration
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Tribunal’s decision as to the language(s) of the arbitration
20-19
Once the Tribunal is constituted, it can decide: (i) whether there has been an agreement on the language(s) of the arbitration;
and (ii) if not, which language(s) should be used for the arbitration. Therefore, if it is left to be decided by the Tribunal, it will
only be decided after the Request and Answer have been filed, perhaps in two different languages.
20-20
If the issue is whether there has been an agreement as to the language of the arbitration, then the Tribunal will have to resolve
it as one of the issues in the proceedings and reflect it generally in the Terms of Reference and subsequently in an award. If the
Tribunal decides that there is an agreement as to the language of the arbitration, one would expect that this would be reflected
in the partial or final award.
20-21
However, if the Tribunal is to decide the language of the arbitration pursuant to its power under art.20 (rather than its
interpretation of whether there was an agreement as to the language of arbitration), the usual course would be to have the issue
decided by a procedural order. 92  Where there is no agreement as to the language of the arbitration, the most efficient way to
proceed is to issue a procedural order at an early stage in the proceedings, that is, prior to the Terms of Reference, to enable
the parties to know the language to be used in the arbitration. The procedural decision of the Tribunal would then usually be
reflected in the Terms of Reference, as a matter that has already been decided by the Tribunal, and the Terms of Reference would
then have to be drafted in that language. It may be seen as a sign of a predisposition if the Tribunal provides the parties with a
draft on the Terms of Reference in a given language, without first having decided the language issue. However, if the Tribunal
has reasons to believe that both parties will understand the draft Terms of Reference in the language it has provisionally chosen
for it, and describes the language issue as one of the issues to be decided, it would seem perfectly proper and sensible for a
Tribunal to proceed in this manner. 93
20-22
Article 20 requires the Tribunal to “determine the language or languages of the arbitration, due regard being given to all relevant
circumstances, including the language of the contract”. The wording of this provision indicates that the language of the contract
will not necessarily be the sole factor, although it certainly is a strong and persuasive one, as will be further discussed at
para.20-29.
20-23
Usually, this analysis will result in the Tribunal deciding that one language shall be used in the arbitration. More infrequently,
for the reasons referred to in para.20-33, Tribunals will decide to use more than one language for the arbitration. An illustration
of the factors considered in deciding on the language of the arbitration is provided in ICC Case No.9875, 94  where the Tribunal
issued a procedural order including the following analysis:
“This provision [corresponding to art.20 of the Rules] invites the Tribunal to give special, but not exclusive,
attention to the language of the contract, which is English. In the practice of ICC arbitration, a certain proportion
of procedures are actually conducted in a language other than that of the contract (cf. LAZAREFF, La langue
de l’arbitrage institutionnel, [1997] Bull. Cour Arb. C.C.I., pp.18–27. ‘The precedent version of the ICC Rules
gave more weight to the language of the contract’). The modified formulation of the 1998 version (‘in particular’
replaced by ‘including’) reveals the admission that the language of the contract does not have such paramount
importance. Other factors must also be considered (‘all relevant circumstances’).

Tribunal’s decision as to the language(s) of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406874...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
The Tribunal does not consider the neutral choice of [city], a bilingual if not polyglot place, as the seat of the
arbitration a convincing factor in determining the language of the procedure. Nor does it consider there should
be a necessary link between such language and the law applicable to the substance of the case, which will be
discussed later.
The Tribunal has also taken the following factors into consideration. The parties are respectively [nationality] and
[nationality]. Even though they have written their contract in English and used English to communicate, they (as
well as the witnesses they may call to appear before the tribunal) may feel disadvantaged at certain stages of this
legal procedure if they have to express themselves in a language other than their own. Both parties have chosen
French-speaking counsel. The parties’ choice of arbitrators, approved by the I.C.C. Court, includes a French
arbitrator who has specified French as the only language in which he could conduct an arbitration without the
assistance of an interpreter or translator and English arbitrator who has said the same about English, while adding
he had a good knowledge of French.
The Tribunal is guided by the concern that this procedure should be concluded efficiently, in fairness to all
parties involved. Under the above circumstances, it decides that English and French will be the languages of the
arbitration, to be applied as follows:
 
—English will be the language used in the tribunal’s correspondence to the parties, procedural orders, awards
and other official documents.
 
—Oral debates may take place in French and English.
Simultaneous translations will be organised.
 
—Written submission will be accepted in either of those languages.
 
—With prior notice, [language] will also be accepted in oral debates, with simultaneous translations into
English and French.
 
—The costs of interpretation and translation will be included in the costs of the arbitration.”
20-24
In the Bombardier Transportation case, 95  the challenging party attempted to have an ICC award set aside, alleging violation by
the Tribunal Terms of Reference, which provided for English as the language of the arbitration. It was argued that by allowing
communications of exhibits in a language other than English, the Tribunal had exceeded its powers and mission (art.1502(3) of
the French NCPC (now art.1520(3) of the French CPC)). The Paris Court of Appeal rejected the challenge stating:
“Considering that, although the Terms of Reference signed by the parties on November 13, 2001, provide as
regards procedural rules that ‘the language used for the deliberations, files and other documents to be presented
by the parties is English’; however a decision of the arbitral tribunal dated April 8, 2002 clarifies ‘that documents
which have been used in prior contractual dealings of the parties and have been used by both parties in a language
other than English, can be communicated in that other language notwithstanding the possibility for the tribunal
to ask for a translation, it appears unreasonable that a party who, during the contract had accepted to work from
French or German documents, would now object to the use of such documents, that the parties have been reminded
of this decision in a letter from the tribunal dated April 30, 2002 as Bombardier which used documents written in
languages other than English, objected nonetheless to the other side’s German documents;
Moreover, taking into account that the tribunal has a jurisdictional prerogative which enabled it to regulate the
proceedings, and that the tribunal rightly took care not to define the procedure too strictly in a way which would
hinder its adaptability to new circumstances during discovery, that the arbitrators have not exceeded their powers,
the first argument for annulment is rejected.” (Authors’ translation)
20-25

Tribunal’s decision as to the language(s) of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406874...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
As illustrated by this case, a Tribunal may consider keeping some flexibility in the Terms of Reference with respect to language
issues, for instance, by providing that it may accept documents submitted in a language other than the language of the arbitration.
20-26
Nevertheless, the Paris Court of Appeal’s ruling in Blow Pack v Windmöller underscores that a Tribunal’s opting for such
flexibility needs to be careful, as such practice may conflict with due process. 96  In Blow Pack, an ICC final award was partially
set aside by the Paris court on the ground that the Tribunal had breached due process when it allowed Windmöller to produce
exhibits that it had translated in part only, on the ground that the translated extracts were the only relevant ones. Moreover,
the president of the Tribunal, a bilingual (French-German) lawyer, took it upon himself to translate extracts of some additional
documents filed by Windmöller himself. According to the Paris court, this deprived the other party of the ability to address such
evidence. Furthermore, the court found that, although French was the language of the arbitration, the Tribunal based its award
exclusively on a forensic expert report, to which the exhibits (accounting documents in German taken from respondent’s IT
system) that had only been translated in part had been annexed. 97  Whatever reservations one may have regarding the Paris
court’s decision, 98  this case illustrates that utmost care must be taken in order not to allow the saving of translation costs result
in a risk of annulment.
20-27
In the UNCITRAL commentary on art.22 of the UNCITRAL Model Law, the point is made that the language of the arbitration
must be determined by reference to art.19(3) of the UNCITRAL Model Law providing that “the parties shall be treated with
equality and each party shall be given a full opportunity of presenting his case”. This corresponds to the principle in art.22(4)
that the parties be given a “reasonable opportunity” to present their case. Therefore, one of the legal circumstances will be the
ability of the parties to present their cases in the arbitration.
20-28
If one party requires translation of the entire proceedings, this may have adverse consequences on its ability to defend itself. It
may cause delay in counsel seeking and obtaining instructions from its client. This is therefore yet another factor the Tribunal
will have to consider when deciding upon the language of the arbitration.
20-29
The sole factor expressly referred to in art.20 is the language of the contract. Generally, a Tribunal will anticipate that a party
who signs a contract in one language is at the very least able to understand that language for the purposes of an arbitration. This
is frequently reinforced by the language of communications between the parties prior to and after the signing of the contract.
20-30
In the case of dual language contracts, the presumption may well be reversed. If parties sign a contract in English and Arabic,
for example, it may well be taken as an indication that the parties are not comfortable in the other language, whether or not
communications are in that language.
20-31
The Tribunal will usually take into account the language abilities of the counsel to the arbitration and, to some lesser extent,
of the arbitrators who have been appointed. If a party has signed a contract in one language and appoints an arbitrator fluent
in that language, then the party is indirectly indicating that it is comfortable in the language. If a party appoints an arbitrator
who is unable to conduct an arbitration in the language of the contract or in a commonly spoken international language in
general, then there may be an issue as to whether that arbitrator is able to conduct arbitral proceedings in accordance with the
requirements of art.11(5).
20-32
As noted above, in many instances, the language of both the contract and the communications between the parties is English.
Therefore, there is a tendency to have arbitrations in English even where neither of the parties has that language as its native
language. Arbitrations are frequently conducted in English, for example in France or Switzerland, and the language of the place
of arbitration in such cases is generally viewed as virtually irrelevant for the purpose of deciding the language of the arbitration.
Likewise, if a project is located in a given country, the language spoken in that country is often also viewed as only marginally
relevant in deciding the language of the arbitration. In addition, the applicable law on the merits would rarely, if ever, be a

Tribunal’s decision as to the language(s) of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406874...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
determining factor when fixing the language. This is true even though the need to translate the laws and judgments is often
undesirable, in particular given the costs that such translations may entail.
Footnotes
92
See in that sense, Paris Court of Appeal, 26 February 2013 (2013) Rev. Arb. No.2, p.524; for a distinction between
“award” and “procedural order” see also discussion under art.34 at para.34-4. Also see the ICC Court of Arbitration
Bulletin 2010 for a discussion of procedural orders on languages.
93
The situation may, however, be different again, if the respondent does not participate in the proceedings, and if therefore
the Terms of Reference need to be approved by the ICC Court pursuant to art.23(3). In such case, the decision on the
language might have to be taken before draft Terms of Reference are being circulated to the parties. See 2012 Secretariat's
Guide, para.3–860, which considers that the Tribunal “must” do so in such case, which is, however, questionable.
94
ICC Case No.9875 (1999) (Partial Award), unreported.
95
La Société Bombardier Transportation Switzerland v La Société Siemens AG, JurisData: 2005-287132. More generally
on art.1520(3) of the French CPC, see Clay, op. cit., pp.292–295, 304–307.
96
Blow Pack v Windmöller et Hölscher KG, Paris Court of Appeal, 1e Ch. 2 April 2013, No.11/18244, (2013) Rev. Arb.
No.2, p.538.
97
The French Supreme Court confirmed this decision, see Cass Civ 1e, 18 March 2015, No.13-22.391, Rev. Arb. 2015
Issue 2 pp.632–633.
98
One of the authors was a party-appointed arbitrator in this matter and considers that the Paris Court of Appeal made an
erroneous assessment of the facts and therefore drew wrong conclusions.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
