Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in
International Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration
(Adopted by resolution of the IBA Council on Thursday 23 October 2014)
Introduction
1. Arbitrators and party representatives are often unsure about the scope of their disclosure obligations. The growth of
international business, including larger corporate groups and international law firms, has generated more disclosures
and resulted in increased complexity in the analysis of disclosure and conflict of interest issues. Parties have more
opportunities to use challenges of arbitrators to delay arbitrations, or to deny the opposing party the arbitrator of
its choice. Disclosure of any relationship, no matter how minor or serious, may lead to unwarranted or frivolous
challenges. At the same time, it is important that more information be made available to the parties, so as to protect
awards against challenges based upon alleged failures to disclose, and to promote a level playing field among parties
and among counsel engaged in international arbitration.
2. Parties, arbitrators, institutions and courts face complex decisions about the information that arbitrators should
disclose and the standards to apply to disclosure. In addition, institutions and courts face difficult decisions when an
objection or a challenge is made after a disclosure. There is a tension between, on the one hand, the parties’ right to
disclosure of circumstances that may call into question an arbitrator’s impartiality or independence in order to protect
the parties’ right to a fair hearing, and, on the other hand, the need to avoid unnecessary challenges against arbitrators
in order to protect the parties’ ability to select arbitrators of their choosing.
3. It is in the interest of the international arbitration community that arbitration proceedings are not hindered by
ill-founded challenges against arbitrators and that the legitimacy of the process is not affected by uncertainty and
a lack of uniformity in the applicable standards for disclosures, objections and challenges. The 2004 Guidelines
reflected the view that the standards existing at the time lacked sufficient clarity and uniformity in their application.
The Guidelines, therefore, set forth some ‘General Standards and Explanatory Notes on the Standards’. Moreover, in
order to promote greater consistency and to avoid unnecessary challenges and arbitrator withdrawals and removals,
the Guidelines list specific situations indicating whether they warrant disclosure or disqualification of an arbitrator.
Such lists, designated ‘Red’, ‘Orange’ and ‘Green’ (the ‘Application Lists’), have been updated and appear at the
end of these revised Guidelines.
4. The Guidelines reflect the understanding of the IBA Arbitration Committee as to the best current international
practice, firmly rooted in the principles expressed in the General Standards below. The General Standards and the
Application Lists are based upon statutes and case law in a cross-section of jurisdictions, and upon the judgement
and experience of practitioners involved in international arbitration. In reviewing the 2004 Guidelines, the IBA
Arbitration Committee updated its analysis of the laws and practices in a number of jurisdictions. The Guidelines
seek to balance the various interests of parties, representatives, arbitrators and arbitration institutions, all of whom
have a responsibility for ensuring the integrity, reputation and efficiency of international arbitration. Both the 2004
Working Group and the Subcommittee in 2012/2014 have sought and considered the views of leading arbitration
institutions, corporate counsel and other persons involved in international arbitration through public consultations at
IBA annual meetings, and at meetings with arbitrators and practitioners. The comments received were reviewed in

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
detail and many were adopted. The IBA Arbitration Committee is grateful for the serious consideration given to its
proposals by so many institutions and individuals.
5. The Guidelines apply to international commercial arbitration and investment arbitration, whether the representation
of the parties is carried out by lawyers or non-lawyers, and irrespective of whether or not non-legal professionals
serve as arbitrators.
6. These Guidelines are not legal provisions and do not override any applicable national law or arbitral rules chosen by
the parties. However, it is hoped that, as was the case for the 2004 Guidelines and other sets of rules and guidelines of
the IBA Arbitration Committee, the revised Guidelines will find broad acceptance within the international arbitration
community, and that they will assist parties, practitioners, arbitrators, institutions and courts in dealing with these
important questions of impartiality and independence. The IBA Arbitration Committee trusts that the Guidelines will
be applied with robust common sense and without unduly formalistic interpretation.
7. The Application Lists cover many of the varied situations that commonly arise in practice, but they do not purport
to be exhaustive, nor could they be. Nevertheless, the IBA Arbitration Committee is confident that the Application
Lists provide concrete guidance that is useful in applying the General Standards. The IBA Arbitration Committee will
continue to study the actual use of the Guidelines with a view to furthering their improvement.
8. In 1987, the IBA published Rules of Ethics for International Arbitrators. Those Rules cover more topics than these
Guidelines, and they remain in effect as to subjects that are not discussed in the Guidelines. The Guidelines supersede
the Rules of Ethics as to the matters treated here.
Part I General Standards Regarding Impartiality, Independence and Disclosure
(1)  General Principle
Every arbitrator shall be impartial and independent of the parties at the time of accepting an appointment to serve and
shall remain so until the final award has been rendered or the proceedings have otherwise finally terminated.
Explanation to General Standard 1:
A fundamental principle underlying these Guidelines is that each arbitrator must be impartial and independent of the
parties at the time he or she accepts an appointment to act as arbitrator, and must remain so during the entire course
of the arbitration proceeding, including the time period for the correction or interpretation of a final award under the
relevant rules, assuming such time period is known or readily ascertainable.
The question has arisen as to whether this obligation should extend to the period during which the award may be
challenged before the relevant courts. The decision taken is that this obligation should not extend in this manner,
unless the final award may be referred back to the original Arbitral Tribunal under the relevant applicable law or
relevant institutional rules. Thus, the arbitrator’s obligation in this regard ends when the Arbitral Tribunal has rendered
the final award, and any correction or interpretation as may be permitted under the relevant rules has been issued,
or the time for seeking the same has elapsed, the proceedings have been finally terminated (for example, because of
a settlement), or the arbitrator otherwise no longer has jurisdiction. If, after setting aside or other proceedings, the

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
dispute is referred back to the same Arbitral Tribunal, a fresh round of disclosure and review of potential conflicts
of interests may be necessary.
(2)  Conflicts of Interest
 
(a) An arbitrator shall decline to accept an appointment or, if the arbitration has already been commenced,
refuse to continue to act as an arbitrator, if he or she has any doubt as to his or her ability to be impartial
or independent.
 
(b) The same principle applies if facts or circumstances exist, or have arisen since the appointment,
which, from the point of view of a reasonable third person having knowledge of the relevant facts and
circumstances, would give rise to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence,
unless the parties have accepted the arbitrator in accordance with the requirements set out in General
Standard 4.
 
(c) Doubts are justifiable if a reasonable third person, having knowledge of the relevant facts and
circumstances, would reach the conclusion that there is a likelihood that the arbitrator may be influenced
by factors other than the merits of the case as presented by the parties in reaching his or her decision.
 
(d) Justifiable doubts necessarily exist as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence in any of the
situations described in the Non-Waivable Red List.
Explanation to General Standard 2:
 
(a) If the arbitrator has doubts as to his or her ability to be impartial and independent, the arbitrator must
decline the appointment. This standard should apply regardless of the stage of the proceedings. This is a
basic principle that is spelled out in these Guidelines in order to avoid confusion and to foster confidence
in the arbitral process.
 
(b) In order for standards to be applied as consistently as possible, the test for disqualification is an
objective one. The wording ‘impartiality or independence’ derives from the widely adopted Article 12
of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) Model Law, and the use
of an appearance test based on justifiable doubts as to the impartiality or independence of the arbitrator,
as provided in Article 12(2) of the UNCITRAL Model Law, is to be applied objectively (a ‘reasonable
third person test’). Again, as described in the Explanation to General Standard 3(e), this standard applies
regardless of the stage of the proceedings.
 
(c) Laws and rules that rely on the standard of justifiable doubts often do not define that standard. This
General Standard is intended to provide some context for making this determination.
 
(d) The Non-Waivable Red List describes circumstances that necessarily raise justifiable doubts as to the
arbitrator’s impartiality or independence. For example, because no one is allowed to be his or her own
judge, there cannot be identity between an arbitrator and a party. The parties, therefore, cannot waive
the conflict of interest arising in such a situation.
(3)  Disclosure by the Arbitrator

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
 
(a) If facts or circumstances exist that may, in the eyes of the parties, give rise to doubts as to the arbitrator’s
impartiality or independence, the arbitrator shall disclose such facts or circumstances to the parties,
the arbitration institution or other appointing authority (if any, and if so required by the applicable
institutional rules) and the co-arbitrators, if any, prior to accepting his or her appointment or, if thereafter,
as soon as he or she learns of them.
 
(b) An advance declaration or waiver in relation to possible conflicts of interest arising from facts and
circumstances that may arise in the future does not discharge the arbitrator’s ongoing duty of disclosure
under General Standard 3(a).
 
(c) It follows from General Standards 1 and 2(a) that an arbitrator who has made a disclosure considers
himself or herself to be impartial and independent of the parties, despite the disclosed facts, and,
therefore, capable of performing his or her duties as arbitrator. Otherwise, he or she would have declined
the nomination or appointment at the outset, or resigned.
 
(d) Any doubt as to whether an arbitrator should disclose certain facts or circumstances should be resolved
in favour of disclosure.
 
(e) When considering whether facts or circumstances exist that should be disclosed, the arbitrator shall not
take into account whether the arbitration is at the beginning or at a later stage.
Explanation to General Standard 3:
 
(a) The arbitrator’s duty to disclose under General Standard 3(a) rests on the principle that the parties have
an interest in being fully informed of any facts or circumstances that may be relevant in their view.
Accordingly, General Standard 3(d) provides that any doubt as to whether certain facts or circumstances
should be disclosed should be resolved in favour of disclosure. However, situations that, such as those
set out in the Green List, could never lead to disqualification under the objective test set out in General
Standard 2, need not be disclosed. As reflected in General Standard 3(c), a disclosure does not imply
that the disclosed facts are such as to disqualify the arbitrator under General Standard 2. The duty of
disclosure under General Standard 3(a) is ongoing in nature.
 
(b) The IBA Arbitration Committee has considered the increasing use by prospective arbitrators of
declarations in respect of facts or circumstances that may arise in the future, and the possible conflicts of
interest that may result, sometimes referred to as ‘advance waivers’. Such declarations do not discharge
the arbitrator’s ongoing duty of disclosure under General Standard 3(a). The Guidelines, however, do
not otherwise take a position as to the validity and effect of advance declarations or waivers, because
the validity and effect of any advance declaration or waiver must be assessed in view of the specific text
of the advance declaration or waiver, the particular circumstances at hand and the applicable law.
 
(c) A disclosure does not imply the existence of a conflict of interest. An arbitrator who has made a
disclosure to the parties considers himself or herself to be impartial and independent of the parties,
despite the disclosed facts, or else he or she would have declined the nomination, or resigned. An
arbitrator making a disclosure thus feels capable of performing his or her duties. It is the purpose
of disclosure to allow the parties to judge whether they agree with the evaluation of the arbitrator
and, if they so wish, to explore the situation further. It is hoped that the promulgation of this General
Standard will eliminate the misconception that disclosure itself implies doubts sufficient to disqualify the
arbitrator, or even creates a presumption in favour of disqualification. Instead, any challenge should only
be successful if an objective test, as set forth in General Standard 2 above, is met. Under Comment 5 of
the Practical Application of the General Standards, a failure to disclose certain facts and circumstances
that may, in the eyes of the parties, give rise to doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence,
does not necessarily mean that a conflict of interest exists, or that a disqualification should ensue.
 
(d) In determining which facts should be disclosed, an arbitrator should take into account all circumstances
known to him or her. If the arbitrator finds that he or she should make a disclosure, but that professional

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
secrecy rules or other rules of practice or professional conduct prevent such disclosure, he or she should
not accept the appointment, or should resign.
 
(e) Disclosure or disqualification (as set out in General Standards 2 and 3) should not depend on the
particular stage of the arbitration. In order to determine whether the arbitrator should disclose, decline
the appointment or refuse to continue to act, the facts and circumstances alone are relevant, not the
current stage of the proceedings, or the consequences of the withdrawal. As a practical matter, arbitration
institutions may make a distinction depending on the stage of the arbitration. Courts may likewise apply
different standards. Nevertheless, no distinction is made by these Guidelines depending on the stage
of the arbitral proceedings. While there are practical concerns, if an arbitrator must withdraw after the
arbitration has commenced, a distinction based on the stage of the arbitration would be inconsistent with
the General Standards.
(4)  Waiver by the Parties
 
(a) If, within 30 days after the receipt of any disclosure by the arbitrator, or after a party otherwise learns
of facts or circumstances that could constitute a potential conflict of interest for an arbitrator, a party
does not raise an express objection with regard to that arbitrator, subject to paragraphs (b) and (c) of
this General Standard, the party is deemed to have waived any potential conflict of interest in respect
of the arbitrator based on such facts or circumstances and may not raise any objection based on such
facts or circumstances at a later stage.
 
(b) However, if facts or circumstances exist as described in the Non-Waivable Red List, any waiver by a
party (including any declaration or advance waiver, such as that contemplated in General Standard 3(b)),
or any agreement by the parties to have such a person serve as arbitrator, shall be regarded as invalid.
 
(c) A person should not serve as an arbitrator when a conflict of interest, such as those exemplified in the
Waivable Red List, exists. Nevertheless, such a person may accept appointment as arbitrator, or continue
to act as an arbitrator, if the following conditions are met:
 
(i) all parties, all arbitrators and the arbitration institution, or other appointing authority (if any), have
full knowledge of the conflict of interest; and
 
(ii) all parties expressly agree that such a person may serve as arbitrator, despite the conflict of interest.
 
(d) An arbitrator may assist the parties in reaching a settlement of the dispute, through conciliation,
mediation or otherwise, at any stage of the proceedings. However, before doing so, the arbitrator should
receive an express agreement by the parties that acting in such a manner shall not disqualify the arbitrator
from continuing to serve as arbitrator. Such express agreement shall be considered to be an effective
waiver of any potential conflict of interest that may arise from the arbitrator’s participation in such a
process, or from information that the arbitrator may learn in the process. If the assistance by the arbitrator
does not lead to the final settlement of the case, the parties remain bound by their waiver. However,
consistent with General Standard 2(a) and notwithstanding such agreement, the arbitrator shall resign
if, as a consequence of his or her involvement in the settlement process, the arbitrator develops doubts
as to his or her ability to remain impartial or independent in the future course of the arbitration.
Explanation to General Standard 4:
 
(a) Under General Standard 4(a), a party is deemed to have waived any potential conflict of interest, if
such party has not raised an objection in respect of such conflict of interest within 30 days. This time

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
limit should run from the date on which the party learns of the relevant facts or circumstances, including
through the disclosure process.
 
(b) General Standard 4(b) serves to exclude from the scope of General Standard 4(a) the facts and
circumstances described in the Non-Waivable Red List. Some arbitrators make declarations that seek
waivers from the parties with respect to facts or circumstances that may arise in the future. Irrespective of
any such waiver sought by the arbitrator, as provided in General Standard 3(b), facts and circumstances
arising in the course of the arbitration should be disclosed to the parties by virtue of the arbitrator’s
ongoing duty of disclosure.
 
(c) Notwithstanding a serious conflict of interest, such as those that are described by way of example
in the Waivable Red List, the parties may wish to engage such a person as an arbitrator. Here, party
autonomy and the desire to have only impartial and independent arbitrators must be balanced. Persons
with a serious conflict of interest, such as those that are described by way of example in the Waivable
Red List, may serve as arbitrators only if the parties make fully informed, explicit waivers.
 
(d) The concept of the Arbitral Tribunal assisting the parties in reaching a settlement of their dispute in the
course of the arbitration proceedings is well-established in some jurisdictions, but not in others. Informed
consent by the parties to such a process prior to its beginning should be regarded as an effective waiver
of a potential conflict of interest. Certain jurisdictions may require such consent to be in writing and
signed by the parties. Subject to any requirements of applicable law, express consent may be sufficient
and may be given at a hearing and reflected in the minutes or transcript of the proceeding. In addition,
in order to avoid parties using an arbitrator as mediator as a means of disqualifying the arbitrator, the
General Standard makes clear that the waiver should remain effective, if the mediation is unsuccessful.
In giving their express consent, the parties should realise the consequences of the arbitrator assisting
them in a settlement process, including the risk of the resignation of the arbitrator.
(5)  Scope
 
(a) These Guidelines apply equally to tribunal chairs, sole arbitrators and co-arbitrators, howsoever
appointed.
 
(b) Arbitral or administrative secretaries and assistants, to an individual arbitrator or the Arbitral Tribunal,
are bound by the same duty of independence and impartiality as arbitrators, and it is the responsibility
of the Arbitral Tribunal to ensure that such duty is respected at all stages of the arbitration.
Explanation to General Standard 5:
 
(a) Because each member of an Arbitral Tribunal has an obligation to be impartial and independent,
the General Standards do not distinguish between sole arbitrators, tribunal chairs, party-appointed
arbitrators or arbitrators appointed by an institution.
 
(b) Some arbitration institutions require arbitral or administrative secretaries and assistants to sign a
declaration of independence and impartiality. Whether or not such a requirement exists, arbitral or
administrative secretaries and assistants to the Arbitral Tribunal are bound by the same duty of
independence and impartiality (including the duty of disclosure) as arbitrators, and it is the responsibility
of the Arbitral Tribunal to ensure that such duty is respected at all stages of the arbitration. Furthermore,

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
this duty applies to arbitral or administrative secretaries and assistants to either the Arbitral Tribunal or
individual members of the Arbitral Tribunal.
(6)  Relationships
 
(a) The arbitrator is in principle considered to bear the identity of his or her law firm, but when considering
the relevance of facts or circumstances to determine whether a potential conflict of interest exists, or
whether disclosure should be made, the activities of an arbitrator’s law firm, if any, and the relationship
of the arbitrator with the law firm, should be considered in each individual case. The fact that the
activities of the arbitrator’s firm involve one of the parties shall not necessarily constitute a source of
such conflict, or a reason for disclosure. Similarly, if one of the parties is a member of a group with
which the arbitrator’s firm has a relationship, such fact should be considered in each individual case,
but shall not necessarily constitute by itself a source of a conflict of interest, or a reason for disclosure.
 
(b) If one of the parties is a legal entity, any legal or physical person having a controlling influence on the
legal entity, or a direct economic interest in, or a duty to indemnify a party for, the award to be rendered
in the arbitration, may be considered to bear the identity of such party.
Explanation to General Standard 6:
 
(a) The growing size of law firms should be taken into account as part of today’s reality in international
arbitration. There is a need to balance the interests of a party to appoint the arbitrator of its choice, who
may be a partner at a large law firm, and the importance of maintaining confidence in the impartiality
and independence of international arbitrators. The arbitrator must, in principle, be considered to bear
the identity of his or her law firm, but the activities of the arbitrator’s firm should not automatically
create a conflict of interest. The relevance of the activities of the arbitrator’s firm, such as the nature,
timing and scope of the work by the law firm, and the relationship of the arbitrator with the law firm,
should be considered in each case. General Standard 6(a) uses the term ‘involve’ rather than ‘acting
for’ because the relevant connections with a party may include activities other than representation on
a legal matter. Although barristers’ chambers should not be equated with law firms for the purposes of
conflicts, and no general standard is proffered for barristers’ chambers, disclosure may be warranted
in view of the relationships among barristers, parties or counsel. When a party to an arbitration is
a member of a group of companies, special questions regarding conflicts of interest arise. Because
individual corporate structure arrangements vary widely, a catch-all rule is not appropriate. Instead, the
particular circumstances of an affiliation with another entity within the same group of companies, and
the relationship of that entity with the arbitrator’s law firm, should be considered in each individual case.
 
(b) When a party in international arbitration is a legal entity, other legal and physical persons may have
a controlling influence on this legal entity, or a direct economic interest in, or a duty to indemnify a
party for, the award to be rendered in the arbitration. Each situation should be assessed individually, and
General Standard 6(b) clarifies that such legal persons and individuals may be considered effectively
to be that party. Third-party funders and insurers in relation to the dispute may have a direct economic
interest in the award, and as such may be considered to be the equivalent of the party. For these purposes,
the terms ‘third-party funder’ and ‘insurer’ refer to any person or entity that is contributing funds, or
other material support, to the prosecution or defence of the case and that has a direct economic interest
in, or a duty to indemnify a party for, the award to be rendered in the arbitration.

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
(7)  Duty of the Parties and the Arbitrator
 
(a) A party shall inform an arbitrator, the Arbitral Tribunal, the other parties and the arbitration institution
or other appointing authority (if any) of any relationship, direct or indirect, between the arbitrator and
the party (or another company of the same group of companies, or an individual having a controlling
influence on the party in the arbitration), or between the arbitrator and any person or entity with a direct
economic interest in, or a duty to indemnify a party for, the award to be rendered in the arbitration. The
party shall do so on its own initiative at the earliest opportunity.
 
(b) A party shall inform an arbitrator, the Arbitral Tribunal, the other parties and the arbitration institution
or other appointing authority (if any) of the identity of its counsel appearing in the arbitration, as well
as of any relationship, including membership of the same barristers’ chambers, between its counsel and
the arbitrator. The party shall do so on its own initiative at the earliest opportunity, and upon any change
in its counsel team.
 
(c) In order to comply with General Standard 7(a), a party shall perform reasonable enquiries and provide
any relevant information available to it.
 
(d) An arbitrator is under a duty to make reasonable enquiries to identify any conflict of interest, as well
as any facts or circumstances that may reasonably give rise to doubts as to his or her impartiality or
independence. Failure to disclose a conflict is not excused by lack of knowledge, if the arbitrator does
not perform such reasonable enquiries.
Explanation to General Standard 7:
 
(a) The parties are required to disclose any relationship with the arbitrator. Disclosure of such relationships
should reduce the risk of an unmeritorious challenge of an arbitrator’s impartiality or independence
based on information learned after the appointment. The parties’ duty of disclosure of any relationship,
direct or indirect, between the arbitrator and the party (or another company of the same group of
companies, or an individual having a controlling influence on the party in the arbitration) has been
extended to relationships with persons or entities having a direct economic interest in the award to be
rendered in the arbitration, such as an entity providing funding for the arbitration, or having a duty to
indemnify a party for the award.
 
(b) Counsel appearing in the arbitration, namely the persons involved in the representation of the parties
in the arbitration, must be identified by the parties at the earliest opportunity. A party’s duty to disclose
the identity of counsel appearing in the arbitration extends to all members of that party’s counsel team
and arises from the outset of the proceedings.
 
(c) In order to satisfy their duty of disclosure, the parties are required to investigate any relevant information
that is reasonably available to them. In addition, any party to an arbitration is required, at the outset
and on an ongoing basis during the entirety of the proceedings, to make a reasonable effort to ascertain
and to disclose available information that, applying the general standard, might affect the arbitrator’s
impartiality or independence.
 
(d) In order to satisfy their duty of disclosure under the Guidelines, arbitrators are required to investigate
any relevant information that is reasonably available to them.
Part II Practical Application of the General Standards

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
1. If the Guidelines are to have an important practical influence, they should address situations that are likely to occur
in today’s arbitration practice and should provide specific guidance to arbitrators, parties, institutions and courts as to
which situations do or do not constitute conflicts of interest, or should or should not be disclosed. For this purpose,
the Guidelines categorise situations that may occur in the following Application Lists. These lists cannot cover every
situation. In all cases, the General Standards should control the outcome.
2. The Red List consists of two parts: ‘a Non-Waivable Red List’ (see General Standards 2(d) and 4(b)); and
‘a Waivable Red List’ (see General Standard 4(c)). These lists are non-exhaustive and detail specific situations
that, depending on the facts of a given case, give rise to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality and
independence. That is, in these circumstances, an objective conflict of interest exists from the point of view of a
reasonable third person having knowledge of the relevant facts and circumstances (see General Standard 2(b)). The
Non-Waivable Red List includes situations deriving from the overriding principle that no person can be his or her own
judge. Therefore, acceptance of such a situation cannot cure the conflict. The Waivable Red List covers situations
that are serious but not as severe. Because of their seriousness, unlike circumstances described in the Orange List,
these situations should be considered waivable, but only if and when the parties, being aware of the conflict of interest
situation, expressly state their willingness to have such a person act as arbitrator, as set forth in General Standard 4(c).
3. The Orange List is a non-exhaustive list of specific situations that, depending on the facts of a given case, may,
in the eyes of the parties, give rise to doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence. The Orange List
thus reflects situations that would fall under General Standard 3(a), with the consequence that the arbitrator has a
duty to disclose such situations. In all these situations, the parties are deemed to have accepted the arbitrator if, after
disclosure, no timely objection is made, as established in General Standard 4(a).
4. Disclosure does not imply the existence of a conflict of interest; nor should it by itself result either in a
disqualification of the arbitrator, or in a presumption regarding disqualification. The purpose of the disclosure is to
inform the parties of a situation that they may wish to explore further in order to determine whether objectively—
that is, from the point of view of a reasonable third person having knowledge of the relevant facts and circumstances
—there are justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence. If the conclusion is that there are no
justifiable doubts, the arbitrator can act. Apart from the situations covered by the Non-Waivable Red List, he or she
can also act if there is no timely objection by the parties or, in situations covered by the Waivable Red List, if there
is a specific acceptance by the parties in accordance with General Standard 4(c). If a party challenges the arbitrator,
he or she can nevertheless act, if the authority that rules on the challenge decides that the challenge does not meet
the objective test for disqualification.
5. A later challenge based on the fact that an arbitrator did not disclose such facts or circumstances should not result
automatically in non-appointment, later disqualification or a successful challenge to any award. Nondisclosure cannot
by itself make an arbitrator partial or lacking independence: only the facts or circumstances that he or she failed to
disclose can do so.
6. Situations not listed in the Orange List or falling outside the time limits used in some of the Orange List situations
are generally not subject to disclosure. However, an arbitrator needs to assess on a case-by-case basis whether a given
situation, even though not mentioned in the Orange List, is nevertheless such as to give rise to justifiable doubts
as to his or her impartiality or independence. Because the Orange List is a non-exhaustive list of examples, there
may be situations not mentioned, which, depending on the circumstances, may need to be disclosed by an arbitrator.
Such may be the case, for example, in the event of repeat past appointments by the same party or the same counsel
beyond the three-year period provided for in the Orange List, or when an arbitrator concurrently acts as counsel in
an unrelated case in which similar issues of law are raised. Likewise, an appointment made by the same party or the
same counsel appearing before an arbitrator, while the case is ongoing, may also have to be disclosed, depending on

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
the circumstances. While the Guidelines do not require disclosure of the fact that an arbitrator concurrently serves, or
has in the past served, on the same Arbitral Tribunal with another member of the tribunal, or with one of the counsel
in the current proceedings, an arbitrator should assess on a case-by-case basis whether the fact of having frequently
served as counsel with, or as an arbitrator on, Arbitral Tribunals with another member of the tribunal may create a
perceived imbalance within the tribunal. If the conclusion is ‘yes’, the arbitrator should consider a disclosure.
7. The Green List is a non-exhaustive list of specific situations where no appearance and no actual conflict of interest
exists from an objective point of view. Thus, the arbitrator has no duty to disclose situations falling within the
Green List. As stated in the Explanation to General Standard 3(a), there should be a limit to disclosure, based on
reasonableness; in some situations, an objective test should prevail over the purely subjective test of ‘the eyes’ of
the parties.
8. The borderline between the categories that comprise the Lists can be thin. It can be debated whether a certain
situation should be on one List instead of another. Also, the Lists contain, for various situations, general terms such as
‘significant’ and ‘relevant’. The Lists reflect international principles and best practices to the extent possible. Further
definition of the norms, which are to be interpreted reasonably in light of the facts and circumstances in each case,
would be counterproductive.
1.  Non-Waivable Red List
1.1 There is an identity between a party and the arbitrator, or the arbitrator is a legal representative or employee of
an entity that is a party in the arbitration.
1.2 The arbitrator is a manager, director or member of the supervisory board, or has a controlling influence on one of
the parties or an entity that has a direct economic interest in the award to be rendered in the arbitration.
1.3 The arbitrator has a significant financial or personal interest in one of the parties, or the outcome of the case.
1.4 The arbitrator or his or her firm regularly advises the party, or an affiliate of the party, and the arbitrator or his
or her firm derives significant financial income therefrom.
2.  Waivable Red List
2.1 Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute
 
2.1.1 The arbitrator has given legal advice, or provided an expert opinion, on the dispute to a party or an
affiliate of one of the parties.
 
2.1.2 The arbitrator had a prior involvement in the dispute.
2.2 Arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
 
2.2.1 The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties, or an affiliate of one of
the parties, this party or an affiliate being privately held.
 
2.2.2 A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the outcome of the
dispute.
 
2.2.3 The arbitrator, or a close family member 1  of the arbitrator, has a close relationship with a non-party
who may be liable to recourse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the dispute.
2.3 Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel
 
2.3.1 The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties, or an affiliate of one of the parties.
 
2.3.2 The arbitrator currently represents or advises the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one of
the parties.
 
2.3.3 The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm as the counsel to one of the parties.
 
2.3.4 The arbitrator is a manager, director or member of the supervisory board, or has a controlling
influence in an affiliate 2  of one of the parties, if the affiliate is directly involved in the matters in dispute
in the arbitration.
 
2.3.5 The arbitrator’s law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case without the arbitrator
being involved himself or herself.
 
2.3.6 The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship with one of the parties,
or an affiliate of one of the parties.
 
2.3.7 The arbitrator regularly advises one of the parties, or an affiliate of one of the parties, but neither the
arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom.
 
2.3.8 The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties, or with a manager, director or
member of the supervisory board, or any person having a controlling influence in one of the parties, or
an affiliate of one of the parties, or with a counsel representing a party.
 
2.3.9 A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial or personal interest in one of the
parties, or an affiliate of one of the parties.
3.  Orange List
3.1 Previous services for one of the parties or other involvement in the case
 
3.1.1 The arbitrator has, within the past three years, served as counsel for one of the parties, or an affiliate
of one of the parties, or has previously advised or been consulted by the party, or an affiliate of the party,
making the appointment in an unrelated matter, but the arbitrator and the party, or the affiliate of the
party, have no ongoing relationship.
 
3.1.2 The arbitrator has, within the past three years, served as counsel against one of the parties, or an
affiliate of one of the parties, in an unrelated matter.
 
3.1.3 The arbitrator has, within the past three years, been appointed as arbitrator on two or more occasions
by one of the parties, or an affiliate of one of the parties. 3
 
3.1.4 The arbitrator’s law firm has, within the past three years, acted for or against one of the parties, or
an affiliate of one of the parties, in an unrelated matter without the involvement of the arbitrator.

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
 
3.1.5 The arbitrator currently serves, or has served within the past three years, as arbitrator in another
arbitration involving one of the parties, or an affiliate of one of the parties.
3.2 Current services for one of the parties
 
3.2.1 The arbitrator’s law firm is currently rendering services to one of the parties, or to an affiliate of one
of the parties, without creating a significant commercial relationship for the law firm and without the
involvement of the arbitrator.
 
3.2.2 A law firm or other legal organisation that shares significant fees or other revenues with the
arbitrator’s law firm renders services to one of the parties, or an affiliate of one of the parties, before
the Arbitral Tribunal.
 
3.2.3 The arbitrator or his or her firm represents a party, or an affiliate of one of the parties to the arbitration,
on a regular basis, but such representation does not concern the current dispute.
3.3 Relationship between an arbitrator and another arbitrator or counsel
 
3.3.1 The arbitrator and another arbitrator are lawyers in the same law firm.
 
3.3.2 The arbitrator and another arbitrator, or the counsel for one of the parties, are members of the same
barristers’ chambers.
 
3.3.3 The arbitrator was, within the past three years, a partner of, or otherwise affiliated with, another
arbitrator or any of the counsel in the arbitration.
 
3.3.4 A lawyer in the arbitrator’s law firm is an arbitrator in another dispute involving the same party or
parties, or an affiliate of one of the parties.
 
3.3.5 A close family member of the arbitrator is a partner or employee of the law firm representing one
of the parties, but is not assisting with the dispute.
 
3.3.6 A close personal friendship exists between an arbitrator and a counsel of a party.
 
3.3.7 Enmity exists between an arbitrator and counsel appearing in the arbitration.
 
3.3.8 The arbitrator has, within the past three years, been appointed on more than three occasions by the
same counsel, or the same law firm.
 
3.3.9 The arbitrator and another arbitrator, or counsel for one of the parties in the arbitration, currently act
or have acted together within the past three years as cocounsel.
3.4 Relationship between arbitrator and party and others involved in the arbitration
 
3.4.1 The arbitrator’s law firm is currently acting adversely to one of the parties, or an affiliate of one
of the parties.
 
3.4.2 The arbitrator has been associated with a party, or an affiliate of one of the parties, in a professional
capacity, such as a former employee or partner.
 
3.4.3 A close personal friendship exists between an arbitrator and a manager or director or a member of the
supervisory board of: a party; an entity that has a direct economic interest in the award to be rendered in
the arbitration; or any person having a controlling influence, such as a controlling shareholder interest,
on one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties or a witness or expert.

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
 
3.4.4 Enmity exists between an arbitrator and a manager or director or a member of the supervisory board
of: a party; an entity that has a direct economic interest in the award; or any person having a controlling
influence in one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties or a witness or expert.
 
3.4.5 If the arbitrator is a former judge, he or she has, within the past three years, heard a significant case
involving one of the parties, or an affiliate of one of the parties.
3.5 Other circumstances
 
3.5.1 The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, that by reason of number or denomination
constitute a material holding in one of the parties, or an affiliate of one of the parties, this party or
affiliate being publicly listed.
 
3.5.2 The arbitrator has publicly advocated a position on the case, whether in a published paper, or speech,
or otherwise.
 
3.5.3 The arbitrator holds a position with the appointing authority with respect to the dispute.
 
3.5.4 The arbitrator is a manager, director or member of the supervisory board, or has a controlling
influence on an affiliate of one of the parties, where the affiliate is not directly involved in the matters
in dispute in the arbitration.
4.  Green List
4.1 Previously expressed legal opinions
 
4.1.1 The arbitrator has previously expressed a legal opinion (such as in a law review article or public
lecture) concerning an issue that also arises in the arbitration (but this opinion is not focused on the case).
4.2 Current services for one of the parties
 
4.2.1 A firm, in association or in alliance with the arbitrator’s law firm, but that does not share significant
fees or other revenues with the arbitrator’s law firm, renders services to one of the parties, or an affiliate
of one of the parties, in an unrelated matter.
4.3 Contacts with another arbitrator, or with counsel for one of the parties
 
4.3.1 The arbitrator has a relationship with another arbitrator, or with the counsel for one of the parties,
through membership in the same professional association, or social or charitable organisation, or through
a social media network.
 
4.3.2 The arbitrator and counsel for one of the parties have previously served together as arbitrators.
 
4.3.3 The arbitrator teaches in the same faculty or school as another arbitrator or counsel to one of the
parties, or serves as an officer of a professional association or social or charitable organisation with
another arbitrator or counsel for one of the parties.

Appendix F - IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
 
4.3.4 The arbitrator was a speaker, moderator or organiser in one or more conferences, or participated in
seminars or working parties of a professional, social or charitable organisation, with another arbitrator
or counsel to the parties.
4.4 Contacts between the arbitrator and one of the parties
 
4.4.1 The arbitrator has had an initial contact with a party, or an affiliate of a party (or their counsel) prior
to appointment, if this contact is limited to the arbitrator’s availability and qualifications to serve, or to
the names of possible candidates for a chairperson, and did not address the merits or procedural aspects
of the dispute, other than to provide the arbitrator with a basic understanding of the case.
 
4.4.2 The arbitrator holds an insignificant amount of shares in one of the parties, or an affiliate of one of
the parties, which is publicly listed.
 
4.4.3 The arbitrator and a manager, director or member of the supervisory board, or any person having a
controlling influence on one of the parties, or an affiliate of one of the parties, have worked together as
joint experts, or in another professional capacity, including as arbitrators in the same case.
 
4.4.4 The arbitrator has a relationship with one of the parties or its affiliates through a social media network.
Footnotes
1
Throughout the Application Lists, the term ‘close family member’ refers to a: spouse, sibling, child, parent or life partner,
in addition to any other family member with whom a close relationship exists.
2
Throughout the Application Lists, the term ‘affiliate’ encompasses all companies in a group of companies, including
the parent company.
3
It may be the practice in certain types of arbitration, such as maritime, sports or commodities arbitration, to draw
arbitrators from a smaller or specialised pool of individuals. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for parties to
frequently appoint the same arbitrator in different cases, no disclosure of this fact is required, where all parties in the
arbitration should be familiar with such custom and practice.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
