The arbitral file, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407071 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
The arbitral file
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
The arbitral file
16-5
The file transmitted to the Tribunal includes the Request, the Answer and counterclaim (if any), the Reply to the counterclaim
(art.5), any Request for Joinder and any Answer to the Request for Joinder (art.7) and most, if not the entire correspondence
between the Secretariat and the parties prior to the transmittal of the file. The Secretariat generally sends the file electronically;
if the parties have supplied it with hard copies, the hard copies will then be sent to the Tribunal.
16-6
In some cases, when the co-arbitrators are to choose the president of the Tribunal, the Secretariat may send them a portion of
the file, i.e. at least the Request and Answer, (where the latter is available) prior to the appointment of the president in order
to give them information about the nature of the arbitration to assist in their selecting of a president. However, this is not a
transmittal of the file within the meaning of art.16 with the consequences discussed below. In any event, the Secretariat has
created a fact sheet called “Case Information”, which it will send to the co-arbitrators to assist them in choosing an appropriate
third arbitrator. 3  This fact-sheet is not binding upon the Tribunal, as it reflects solely the Secretariat’s understanding of the case.
The Case Information is also sent to the entire Tribunal upon transmission of the file and copied to the parties. If they consider
that it contains wrong or misleading information, they will inform the Tribunal, but also the Secretariat.
16-7
The Secretariat establishes a list of the documents and correspondence transmitted to the Tribunal, copied to the parties. This
allows them to review this list to ensure that no important communications have been left out, and that they themselves are in
possession of all these documents. The Secretariat will usually only send a copy of these documents to the parties on request
(as they should already have received them).
16-8
A party may wish to have certain correspondence excluded from the file transmitted to the Tribunal. For example, if a party
has expressed preferences as to the background of the president, it may prefer not to have such correspondence disclosed. If
a party has such a concern, it should contact the Secretariat prior to the file being transmitted to the Tribunal. Excluding such
correspondence would not appear to raise any procedural issues because the correspondence does not relate to the dispute itself.
16-9
In transmitting the file to the Tribunal, the Secretariat will point out to the parties that from then on, they should be writing
directly to the Tribunal, with simultaneous copies to the other side and the Secretariat. As of this moment, the role of the
Secretariat is more limited and the Tribunal will interact directly with the parties. Nevertheless, the Secretariat is copied on all
correspondence with the parties and monitors compliance with the time limits under the Rules. As from that time, the Secretariat
only requires electronic copies of the parties written submissions.
Footnotes
3
This fact sheet will quote the relevant arbitration clause, the language and place of the arbitration. It will also provide
the amount in dispute with reference to a “Financial Table,” which indicates, e.g. the range of the arbitrators’ fees.

The arbitral file, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407071 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
