Document 4.3: ICC Emergency Arbitrator Statement of..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Document 4.3: ICC Emergency Arbitrator Statement of
Acceptance, Availability, Impartiality and Independence
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part II - Models, Precedents and Examples
Document 4.3: ICC Emergency Arbitrator Statement of Acceptance, Availability, Impartiality and Independence 1
CASE N° ...............
II-4. 3
Family Name(s): ...............
Given Name(s): ...............
Please tick all relevant boxes.
1. Acceptance
Acceptance
◯ I accept to serve as emergency arbitrator under and in accordance with the 2012, 2017 and 2021 ICC Rules of Arbitration
(“Rules”). I am aware that (i) other candidates may have been contacted by the ICC to serve as emergency arbitrator in
this case and (ii) the urgency of the proceedings may require the ICC to appoint another candidate before receiving my
response. I confirm that I am familiar with the Rules, in particular Article 29 and Appendix V. I accept that my remuneration
will be in accordance with Article 7 of Appendix V. By accepting to serve as arbitrator under the Rules, unless otherwise
agreed by the parties, I accept that my name, nationality, role and the method of my appointment as well as the termination
of my assignment will be published on the ICC Court’s website.
Non-Acceptance
◯ I decline to serve as emergency arbitrator in this case. (If you tick here, simply date and sign the form without completing
any other sections.)
2. Availability
□ I confirm, on the basis of the information presently available to me, that I can devote the time necessary to conduct this
emergency arbitrator proceeding throughout the entire duration of the case as diligently, efficiently and expeditiously as
possible in accordance with the time limits in Article 6(4) of Appendix V to the Rules, subject to any extensions granted
by the President. I understand that it is important to complete these proceedings as promptly as reasonably practicable.
Furthermore, I am not aware of any commitments which might preclude me from completing the emergency arbitrator
proceeding on time, or from devoting to them the attention that they require.
3. Independence and Impartiality
(Tick one box and provide details below and/or, if necessary, on a separate sheet)
In deciding which box to tick, you should take into account, having regard to Article 2(4) of Appendix V to the Rules,
whether there exists any past or present relationship, direct or indirect, whether financial, professional or of any other
kind, between you and any of the parties to this emergency arbitrator proceeding, their lawyers or other representatives, or
related entities and individuals. Any doubt must be resolved in favour of disclosure. Any disclosure should be complete
and specific, identifying inter alia relevant dates (both start and end dates), financial arrangements, details of companies
and individuals, and all other relevant information. In deciding which box to tick and as the case may be in preparing

Document 4.3: ICC Emergency Arbitrator Statement of..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
your disclosure, you should also consult with care the relevant sections of the Note to the Parties and Arbitral Tribunals
on the Conduct of the Arbitration.
◯ Nothing to disclose: I am impartial and independent and intend to remain so. To the best of my knowledge, and having
made due enquiry, there are no facts or circumstances, past or present, that I should disclose because they might be of such
a nature as to call into question my independence in the eyes of any of the parties to this emergency arbitrator proceeding
and no circumstances that could give rise to reasonable doubts as to my impartiality.
◯ Acceptance with disclosure: I am impartial and independent and intend to remain so. However, mindful of my obligation
to disclose any facts or circumstances which might be of such a nature as to call into question my independence in the
eyes of any of the parties to this emergency arbitrator proceeding or that could give rise to reasonable doubts as to my
impartiality, I draw attention to the matters below and/or on the attached sheet.
Use one of the following options to sign the document:
 
1) Copy your signature from a Word document and paste it in this form.
 
2)Draw your ink signature (click here for further assistance).
 
3) Add your electronic signature.
 
4) Print the form, sign it and scan it.
Date:
..........
Signature:
..........
Disclaimer: Your personal data is collected by ICC as data controller, for the purpose of conducting ICC proceedings. You
have the right to access, rectify, erase, the right to portability of your personal data, the right to restrict and object the
processing, by sending an email to dataprotection@iccwbo.org or writing to the International Chamber of Commerce, ICC
DPO, 33-43 avenue du Président Wilson 75116 Paris, France. For further information about this processing, please visit
the ICC Data Privacy Notice for ICC Dispute Resolution Proceedings page.
Footnotes
1
© International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). Reproduced with kind permission of ICC. The text reproduced here
is valid at the time of reproduction in July 2021. As amendments may be made to the text, please refer to the
websitehttps://iccwbo.org/dispute-resolution-services for the latest version and for more information on ICC dispute
resolution services. Also available in the ICC Digital Library at http://library.iccwbo.org.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
