Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638649 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section A. - Introduction
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 7 - Role of National Courts During the Proceedings
Section A. - Introduction
7. 01
The relationship between national courts and arbitral tribunals presents a paradox. Arbitration, founded on the agreement of
the parties, is an alternative to litigation before a national court. Nevertheless, at various stages of the process, arbitration is
dependent on the underlying support of national courts. As Lord Mustill, a former senior English judge and arbitrator, has stated:
[T]here is plainly a tension here. On the one hand the concept of arbitration as a consensual process reinforced
by the ideas of transnationalism leans against the involvement of the mechanisms of state through the medium
of a municipal court. On the other side there is the plain fact, palatable or not, that it is only a Court possessing
coercive powers which could rescue the arbitration if it is in danger of foundering. 1
7. 02
A party who chooses to refer disputes to arbitration chooses a private system of justice. But considerations of public policy
impose restrictions upon this freedom of choice. Most states limit the scope of arbitration to disputes that the state itself considers
suitable for determination by this private system of justice —that is to say, disputes that are, because of their subject matter,
‘arbitrable’ in the sense discussed elsewhere in this volume. 2  But, as we have seen, the concept of what is and what is not
‘arbitrable’ differs from one country to another, and even over time. 3  The state prescribes the boundaries of arbitration and
enforces these boundaries through its courts. The state also determines other limitations upon the arbitral process: for instance,
whether arbitrators have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses or the disclosure of documents and more importantly,
whether or not any appeal to the state’s national court is possible, and if so, how, when, and upon what terms. 4
7. 03
The paradoxical relationship between arbitral tribunals and the courts oscillates between partnership and forced cohabitation.
To the extent that the relationship between national courts and arbitral tribunals is said to be one of ‘partnership’, 5  it is not
a partnership of equals. Arbitration depends upon the agreement of the parties, but it is also a system built on law, which
relies upon that law to make it effective both nationally and internationally. National courts could exist without arbitration, but
arbitration could not exist without national courts. The real issue is to define the point at which this reliance of arbitration on
the courts begins and that at which it ends. That point is constantly changing over time and across jurisdictions. 6
(a) The increasing independence of arbitration
7. 04
As noted in Chapter 1, arbitration is now the principal method of resolving international disputes involving states, individuals,
and corporations. This reality has led the arbitral process to distance itself, where possible, from the risk of domestic judicial
parochialism. Modern international arbitration has consequently achieved a considerable degree of independence from national
courts. For example, the arbitration clause in an international contract is generally recognised as being an independent
agreement, which survives any termination of the contract in which it is contained. 7  The parties themselves are generally free
to determine how their disputes are to be resolved, subject only to such safeguards as may be considered necessary as a matter
of public policy; and arbitrators are free to decide on their own jurisdiction, subject only to differing degrees of review by the
national courts of the seat of the arbitration and of the place of recognition or enforcement. The parties are free to choose which
system or rules of law will govern the dispute between them 8 —and, indeed, they may even select general principles, such as
the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts. 9  Finally, judicial control of errors of law in international

Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638649 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
arbitration has been virtually abandoned, leaving courts the limited role of policing only public policy and procedural due
process, such as the obligation of the tribunal to give each party a fair hearing.
7. 05
Nonetheless, the arbitral process remains (primarily) subject to the arbitration law of the country in which it has its juridical seat,
which, as observed by Rawding and Snodgrass, ‘should be the first port of call for any necessary judicial assistance to allow the
arbitration to proceed or to secure the parties’ rights while the arbitration is pending’. 10  It is (secondarily) also subject to the
arbitration law of the country, or countries, in which a winning party may seek to recognise or enforce the eventual award. 11
In other words, the involvement of national courts in the international arbitration process remains essential to its effectiveness.
For instance, the ever-increasing trend to seek interim measures, or interlocutory support for the arbitral process, has placed a
renewed focus on the respective roles of the arbitral tribunal and the courts.
(b) Limitations on independence
7. 06
Article 5 of the Model Law declares that no court shall intervene in matters governed by the Model Law, except where
permitted by that law. At first sight, this is a powerful declaration of independence. Yet the Model Law does not seek to
exclude the participation of what it calls the ‘competent court’ 12  in carrying out ‘certain functions of arbitration assistance and
supervision’. On closer examination of the Model Law itself, it becomes apparent that of its thirty-six Articles, no fewer than
ten recognise a possible role for the ‘competent court’. For example, Article 11 acknowledges that the help of the competent
court may be necessary to constitute the arbitral tribunal; Article 13 acknowledges that the competent court may have to decide
upon a challenge to an arbitrator if there are justifiable doubts as to that arbitrator’s impartiality or independence; Article 16
acknowledges that a party to an international arbitration may apply to the competent court to review the decision of the arbitral
tribunal on jurisdiction—in which case, it is the decision of that court (and not the decision of the arbitral tribunal) that is final
and binding. The Model Law also acknowledges that the assistance of the competent court may be necessary in the taking of
evidence, 13  and that, in any challenge to the arbitral award, or to its recognition and enforcement, the judgment of the competent
court will be decisive. 14
(c) ‘A relay race’
7. 07
If there is a resulting partnership between arbitrators and the national courts, it is one in which each has a different role to play
at different times. This relationship between courts and arbitrators has been imaginatively compared to a relay race:
Ideally, the handling of arbitral disputes should resemble a relay race. In the initial stages, before the arbitrators
are seized of the dispute, the baton is in the grasp of the court; for at that stage there is no other organisation which
could take steps to prevent the arbitration agreement from being ineffectual. When the arbitrators take charge
they take over the baton and retain it until they have made an award. At this point, having no longer a function
to fulfil, the arbitrators hand back the baton so that the court can in case of need lend its coercive powers to the
enforcement of the award. 15
In principle, there should be no disputes as to where the frontier between the public world of the courts and the private world of
arbitration lies. At the beginning of an arbitration, national courts (not the arbitrators) have the task of enforcing the agreement
to arbitrate if one of the parties should seek to avoid it. At the end of the arbitral process, national courts (not the arbitrators) must
also enforce the arbitral award if the losing party is not prepared to comply with it voluntarily. During the arbitral process, the
arbitrators (not the courts) must take charge of the proceedings, set time limits, organise meetings and hearings, issue procedural
directions, consider the arguments of fact and law put forward by, or on behalf of, the parties, and make their award.
7. 08

Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638649 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Unfortunately, the respective dominions of arbitral tribunals and national courts are not as clearly distinguished as this metaphor
suggests. As Lord Mustill went on to observe:
In real life the position is not so clear-cut. Very few commentators would now assert that the legitimate functions
of the Court entirely cease when the arbitrators receive the file, and conversely very few would doubt that there is
a point at which the Court takes on a purely subordinate role. But when does this happen? And what is the position
at the further end of the process? Does the Court retake the baton only if and when invited to enforce the award,
or does it have functions to be exercised at an earlier stage, if something has gone wrong with the arbitration, by
setting aside the award or intervening in some other way? 16
Footnotes
1
Coppée Levalin NV v Ken-Ren Fertilisers and Chemicals [1994] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 109 (HL), at 116 per Lord Mustill.
2
See Chapter 2.E.
3
See, e.g., the changed attitude of the US courts towards the arbitration of antitrust, securities, or patent issues.
4
See Chapter 10.
5
See, e.g., Goldman, The Complementary Role of Judges and Arbitrators, ICC Publication No. 412 (ICC, 1984), p. 259.
6
The relationship between arbitration and national courts is one of continuous evolution. The Rt. Hon. Dame Elizabeth
Gloster DBE, PC observed that this ongoing change is the product inter alia of ‘a broader, international conversation’
taking place at fora such as the Standing International Forum of Commercial Courts, which discussed at its inauguration
in May 2017 ‘how international commercial courts and arbitration could best work together’: Gloster, ‘Symbiosis
or sadomasochism? The relationship between the courts and arbitration’ (2018) 34 Arb Intl 321, at 322; Courts
and Tribunals Judiciary, ‘A Unique Gathering of Commercial Courts’, 15 May 2017, available online at https://
www.judiciary.uk/announcements/a-unique-gathering-of-commercial-courts/.
7
See the discussion of separability in Chapter 2, paragraphs 2.107ff.
8
Model Law, Art. 28(1): ‘The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with such rules of law as are chosen
by the parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute.’
9
The UNIDROIT Principles represent a private codification or ‘restatement’ of international contract law. What was at
the time one of the largest disputes referred to international arbitration was decided under these Principles: see Bonell,
‘A “global” arbitration decided on the basis of the UNIDROIT Principles’ (2001) 17 Arb Intl 249. See also Bonell, An
International Restatement of Contract Law: The UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts (Brill,
2005), pp. 273-274. For a detailed analysis, see Vogenauer and Kleinheisterkamp (eds) Commentary on the UNIDROIT
Principles of International Commercial Contracts (PICC) (Oxford University Press, 2009).
10
Rawding and Snodgrass, ‘Global Overview’, in Nairn KC and Heneghan (eds) Arbitration World (5th edn, Sweet &
Maxwell, 2015), para. 2.3.3.
11
Lew, ‘Does national court involvement undermine the international arbitration processes?’ (2009) 24(3) Am Uni Intl
Law Rev 489, at 494, citing Karaha Bodas Co. v Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gas Bumi Negara, 335 F.3d
357, 364 (5th Cir. 2003): ‘Under the [New York] Convention, “the country in which, or under the [arbitration] law of
which, [an] award was made” is said to have primary jurisdiction over the arbitration award. All other signatory States
are secondary jurisdictions, in which parties can only contest whether that State should enforce the arbitral award.’
12
The competent court is defined in Model Law, Art. 6, as the court or other authority specified by each state as being
competent to perform the functions entrusted to it by the Model Law.
13
Model Law, Art. 27.
14
Ibid., Arts 34–36.
15
Mustill, ‘Comments and conclusions’, in International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) (ed.) Conservatory Provisional
Measures in International Arbitration: 9th Joint Colloquium (ICC, 1993), p. 118.
16
Ibid.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
