Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section C. - Grounds for Challenge
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 10 - Challenge of Arbitral Awards
Section C. - Grounds for Challenge
10. 30
Each state has its own concept of what measure of control it wishes to exercise over an arbitral process that takes place in its
territory and, in particular, whether it wishes in this respect to distinguish between ‘domestic’ and ‘international’ arbitration.
It is thus necessary to consult the law of the arbitral seat in order to determine the grounds on which a particular award may
be challenged.
10. 31
It is beyond the scope of this book to review all these different legal systems. It may nevertheless be helpful to discern the areas
in which judicial control, or review, is likely to occur.
10. 32
There are essentially three broad areas in which an arbitral award is likely to be challenged before a national court at the seat
of the arbitration. First, an award may be challenged on jurisdictional grounds—for example, the non-existence of a valid and
binding arbitration agreement—or on grounds that go to the admissibility of the claim determined by the tribunal. Secondly, an
award may be challenged on what may broadly be described as ‘procedural’ grounds, such as failure to give a party an equal
opportunity to be heard. Thirdly, and most rarely, an award may be challenged on substantive grounds, on the basis that the
arbitral tribunal made a mistake of law. We will illustrate these broad categories by reference to the grounds for challenge set
out in the Model Law 58  which has now been adapted or adopted by eighty-five states 59  and has been a strong influence on
other states, such as the United Kingdom, when drafting their laws governing arbitration.
(a) Grounds under the Model Law
10. 33
The Model Law provides that an action for setting aside an award may be brought before the designated courts of the state
in which an award was made 60  pursuant only to the grounds exhaustively set out in the Law. These grounds are taken from
Article V of the New York Convention. There is a pleasing symmetry here: Article V of the New York Convention sets out the
grounds on which recognition and enforcement of an international award may be refused, while Article 34 of the Model Law
sets out the same grounds (with only slight differences of language) on which an award may be set aside. These grounds are:
 
•lack of capacity to conclude an arbitration agreement, or lack of a valid arbitration agreement;
 
•the aggrieved party was not given proper notice of the appointment of the arbitral tribunal, or the arbitral proceedings,
or was otherwise unable to present its case;
 
•the award deals with matters not contemplated by, or falling within, the arbitration clause or submission agreement, or
goes beyond the scope of what was submitted;
 
•the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties,
or with the mandatory provisions of the Model Law itself;
 
•the subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of the state in which the arbitration
takes place; and/or

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
•the award (or any decision within it) is in conflict with the public policy of the state in which the arbitration takes place. 61
10. 34
One provision of the Model Law mitigates, to some extent, the ‘all or nothing’ approach of the Model Law, under which an
award is either set aside or left to stand. Where appropriate, upon application by a party, the court may suspend the setting-aside
proceedings in order to give the arbitral tribunal an opportunity to resume the arbitral proceedings, or to take such other action
as, in the arbitral tribunal’s opinion, will eliminate the grounds for setting aside. 62  In effect, this is an equivalent provision to
that of remitting the award to the tribunal for reconsideration.
10. 35
The grounds for challenge may be broadly categorised as:
 
•grounds that concern whether the claim in question is capable of adjudication (including issues of incapacity, invalid
agreements to arbitrate, a tribunal’s excess of powers, or the arbitrability of the subject matter of the dispute);
 
•procedural grounds (including issues relating to the composition of the arbitral tribunal); and
 
•substantive grounds (including mistakes of law, mistakes of fact, and public policy).
(b) Adjudicability
10. 36
As discussed in Chapter 5, an arbitral tribunal is empowered to decide for itself whether or not it has jurisdiction over a particular
dispute under the doctrine of ‘competence-competence’. If its jurisdiction is challenged, the arbitral tribunal may decide the
point as a preliminary issue in an interim award or as part of its award on the merits. In either case, however, the decision of
the arbitral tribunal is not necessarily the last word on the subject: that rests with the national court which, depending on the
jurisdiction, may have the power to review the question de novo or review the decision deferentially. The Model Law provides
for a de novo review by stating that if the arbitral tribunal rules as a preliminary question that it has jurisdiction, this ruling may be
referred to the competent court (within thirty days) for the court’s decision, which is final. 63  In England, the courts have power
to review the jurisdictional decision de novo. 64  The same is true in France. 65  Curiously, in the Netherlands, only a decision
accepting jurisdiction is reviewable de novo and a decision denying jurisdiction is given the same deference as a decision on
the merits. 66  In the United States, the standard depends on whether the jurisdictional decision was based on compliance with
procedural preconditions (that is, when the obligation to arbitrate arises), in which case deferential review applies, or consent
to arbitrate at all (that is, if the obligation to arbitrate arises). Only in the second case a de novo test will be applied. 67
(i) Incapacity to consent to arbitration or invalid arbitration agreement
10. 37
The first ground for challenging an award under Article 34(2)(a)(i) of the Model Law provides that:
 
(i) a party to the arbitration agreement [ … ] was under some incapacity; or the said agreement
is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication
thereon, under the law of this State; [ … ]
10. 38
This conflates two separate grounds. Both the issue of ‘capacity’ and the requirements for an enforceable arbitration
agreement are discussed in detail in Chapter 2. Challenges based on the absence of a valid and binding arbitration agreement

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
are not an uncommon ground for challenge. They are often made by non-signatories who have been brought into arbitral
proceedings contrary to their wishes. 68
10. 39
Another challenge as to the validity of the arbitration agreement arose out of great tension between European Union (EU) law
and international investment arbitration. In Achmea, an arbitral tribunal seated in Germany constituted under the UNCITRAL
Rules pursuant to the BIT between the Netherlands and Slovakia awarded the claimant investor damages of €22.1 million
against Slovakia. Slovakia then applied to set aside the award before the German courts on the basis, inter alia, that there
was no valid arbitration agreement since it was inconsistent with EU law. The application was dismissed, and subsequently
reached the German Federal Court of Justice. The Federal Court confirmed that the case raised untested questions about
the interpretation of EU law and referred the question to the Court of Justice of the European Union (the CJEU) under the
preliminary reference procedure to opine on the compatibility of investor–state arbitration under an intra-EU BIT with the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). 69  The CJEU concluded 70  that the investor–state arbitration
provision of an investment treaty between two EU states was incompatible with EU law as investment arbitration tribunals
may be called upon to decide questions of EU law (since EU law is part of a member state’s domestic and international
law obligations). However, since an investment arbitration tribunal is not part of the EU judicial system, the tribunal would
not have the power to refer any question concerning EU law to the CJEU (as would a national court). Consequently, the
arbitration provision of intra-EU BITs would be contrary to EU law (as it would effectively bypass the protection of the CJEU
as a guarantee of uniformity of interpretation of EU law).
10. 40
In applying this decision, the German Federal Supreme Court set aside the award in favour of Achmea on the basis that there
was no valid arbitration agreement 71  since Slovakia’s offer to arbitrate in the Treaty was inapplicable and could not give
rise to an arbitration agreement. 72
10. 41
The risks of an arbitral award made pursuant to an intra EU BIT being set aside are therefore high (particularly in cases
seated in an EU jurisdiction). 73  Those risks may be mitigated if a London seat is chosen since the UK courts have proven
to be less deferential to the idea that EU law trumps other international obligations that arise from investment treaties or the
ICSID Convention. 74
(ii) An arbitral tribunal’s excess of powers
10. 42
A further ground for challenge under the Model Law is that the arbitral tribunal has exceeded its powers in the decision that
it has rendered. In the words of Article 34(2)(a)(iii):
 
(iii) the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of
the submission to arbitration, or contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration
can be separated from those not so submitted, only that part of the award which contains
decisions on matters not submitted to arbitration may be set aside; [ … ]
10. 43
This ground of challenge contemplates a situation in which an award has been made by a tribunal that did have jurisdiction
to deal with the dispute, but which exceeded its powers by dealing with claims that had not been submitted to it. 75  By way
of example, the Paris Court of Appeal found that a tribunal exceeded its powers by awarding a party damages in an amount
that significantly exceeded the damages claimed. 76

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
10. 44
Where an arbitral tribunal fails to deal with all of the issues referred to it for determination, it is usually said that the award
should at least be upheld in respect of the issues with which it does deal. However, this is perhaps too simplistic. The
significance of the issues that were not addressed must be considered in relation to the award as a whole. A situation might
be envisaged in which the issues that were overlooked were of such importance that, if they had been dealt with, the whole
balance of the award would have been altered and its effect would have been different. 77
10. 45
In such circumstances, it seems fair that the aggrieved party should have a right of recourse against the entire award. However,
national laws are divided on the subject and no right of recourse against the entire award is available under the Model Law. 78
(iii) Arbitrability
10. 46
The concept of ‘arbitrability’, which provides another ground on which to challenge an award, has already been discussed in
detail. 79  Under the Model Law, an award can be challenged if ‘the subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by
arbitration’. 80  As discussed in Chapter 2, the arbitrability of a dispute is usually linked to the underlying public policy of the
state in which the arbitration takes place. 81  The law applicable to the dispute, however, may also curtail the parties’ freedom
to submit certain disputes to arbitration. In Belgium, for example, a Brussels court annulled an award after concluding that
the subject matter was not arbitrable under the law governing the dispute, namely, Greek law. 82  Many states prohibit the
arbitration of disputes that are not suited to the confidential nature of the arbitral process and which have effects on third
parties. Typically, these include questions of insolvency, personal status, and certain types of intellectual property dispute
(such as the validity of patents).
(c) Procedural grounds
10. 47
The second broad category of grounds for challenging arbitral awards relates to deficiencies in the way in which the arbitral
tribunal was appointed or the arbitral procedure was conducted. As set out in Article 34(2)(c)(ii) of the Model Law, an award
can be challenged when ‘the party making the application was not given proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of
the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case’.
(i) Lack of due process—procedural irregularity
10. 48
Certain minimum procedural standards must be observed in the fair and proper conduct of an international arbitration. These
procedural standards are designed to ensure that the arbitral tribunal is properly constituted, that the arbitral procedure is in
accordance with the agreement of the parties (subject to any mandatory provisions of the applicable law), and that the parties
are given proper notice of the proceedings, hearings, and awards. In short, the aim is to ensure that the parties are treated with
equality and are given a fair hearing, with a proper opportunity to present their respective cases. 83
10. 49
Most lawyers with experience of litigation or arbitration should find it relatively easy to agree upon these basic principles.
The same body of lawyers, however, might find it more difficult to agree upon a set of rules to implement them. Some
national systems of law, whilst rightly insisting upon the need for each of the parties to an arbitration to be given a fair
hearing, have little or no legislation to guide the parties or the arbitral tribunal. In practice, it is left to national courts to

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
determine, from case to case, exactly what is required to constitute a ‘fair hearing’. This may require that the parties be heard,
be allowed to attend any oral hearings, and be represented or assisted by a representative of their choice. Failure to observe
these rules of procedure may be a ground for the challenge of an award, 84  although procedural grounds for challenge are
often rightly viewed by many national courts with circumspection, because they are often employed by unsuccessful parties
in an opportunistic attempt to avoid compliance with the award. 85
10. 50
By way of example, US federal courts have regarded the failure to give the parties an oral hearing where one is requested
to be a violation of due process, and they recognise this as a ground for setting aside an award or for refusing recognition
and enforcement under the New York Convention. 86  In civil law systems, the right of the parties to have a full opportunity
to present their case—the classic droit de la défense—often incorporates the principe du contradictoire, which requires that
no evidence or argument should serve as a basis for a decision unless it has been subject to the possibility of comment and
contradiction by the other parties. 87
10. 51
Thus, when a question arises as to whether or not an arbitration was conducted properly, each national court approaches the
question from its own particular national standpoint. This is understandable, but it may lead to difficulties. The arbitration
proceedings may have been conducted by lawyers from different legal backgrounds, accustomed to different procedures and
professional ethics. 88  The rules of the leading arbitral institutions are themselves vague on the question of what procedure
should be followed. This is a deliberate policy, since the rules are intended to be suitable for use in many different countries
of the world, with many different systems of trial. 89  However, international arbitration has become sufficiently established
and widespread for the development of some common procedures, as discussed in Chapter 6. 90
10. 52
In 2020, the degree of consensus on due process in international arbitration was put to test by the COVID-19 pandemic,
which unexpectedly forced parties and tribunals to adapt to remote proceedings and hearings. As discussed in Chapter 4,
several arbitral institutions such as the LCIA and the ICC issued protocols and now expressly provide for remote hearings
in their rules. They have also embraced electronic communications and filings. The question has arisen as to whether the
imposition of remote proceedings over a party’s objection could constitute a procedural irregularity sufficient to set aside of
the award. As noted in Chapter 5, a report commissioned by the International Council for Commercial Arbitration (ICCA)
concluded that no jurisdiction’s lex arbitri contained an express provision setting out a right to a physical hearing, which
implies that arbitrators can indeed order a remote hearing if the circumstances so require, provided the parties are equally
heard within that procedure. 91
10. 53
In Europe, the concept of ‘due process’ is reflected in the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), 92  Article 6(1) of
which provides that: ‘In the determination of his civil rights and obligations or of any criminal charge against him, everyone
is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law.’
10. 54
An agreement to arbitrate under rules which establish that hearings are private operates as a waiver of the entitlement under
Article 6 ECHR to a public hearing. However, in BEG SpA v Italy, 93  the ECtHR confirmed that a voluntary arbitration
agreement did not represent a waiver of other rights enshrined in Article 6 (such as the independence and impartiality of
arbitrators). It consequently held that it had jurisdiction to review an arbitral award issued by a tribunal constituted under
the arbitration rules of the Rome Chamber of Commerce and the related challenged decisions of the Italian courts for their
compatibility with Article 6 ECHR. It concluded on the facts of the case that Italy had breached its obligations under Article
6 ECHR for failing to annul an award issued by an arbitrator who was not independent or impartial.
10. 55
In summary, an arbitration agreement may constitute a waiver of the right to a public hearing but is not intended to be a
blanket waiver of the guarantees to a ‘fair hearing’ contained in Article 6 ECHR. 94  When considering a challenge to an

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
award on grounds of a violation of ‘due process’, courts in Europe should therefore have regard to the safeguards of Article
6 and their failure to do so could result in their condemnation before the ECtHR. 95
(ii) Further procedural issues
10. 56
An award is also at risk of challenge where the composition of the arbitral tribunal and the procedure adopted in the arbitration
are not in conformity with the agreement of the parties or, failing such agreement, with the law. 96  By way of example, a
failure to comply with the agreement of the parties as to the appointment of the tribunal could include cases in which an
arbitrator does not meet the particular qualifications specified in the arbitration agreement; failure to comply with the required
procedure could include the rendering of an award without reasons where such a requirement is imposed by law.
10. 57
If there is no specific agreement between the parties as to the composition of the tribunal, there can be no complaint if
the arbitrators are selected according to the method prescribed by the applicable rules or law. But it is noteworthy that the
constitution of the arbitral tribunal in accordance with the agreement of the parties will incorporate the relevant institutional
rules as to independence and impartiality. So even if a challenge to an arbitrator for lack of independence and impartiality
fails during the arbitral process itself, it can be argued again as a ground to set aside an adverse award.
10. 58
For example, in 2019, the French Court of Cassation confirmed the decision of the Paris Court of Appeal to set aside an
award based on the failure by the respondent’s arbitrator to disclose that his law firm represented an entity that was part of
the respondent’s corporate group in unrelated proceedings. 97
10. 59
Similarly, in June 2020, the ICSID ad hoc committee in Eiser v Spain annulled a €128 million award on the basis that the
arbitrator appointed by the claimant had failed to disclose numerous past and present connections with the claimant’s damages
expert in cases where the arbitrator acted as counsel. 98  The ad hoc committee found that those connections created an
‘obvious appearance of lack of impartiality’ and that the failure to disclose them to the co-arbitrators during the deliberations
may have had a material effect on the award, thus amounting to a serious departure from the fundamental rule of procedure
guaranteeing an independent and impartial tribunal.
10. 60
Not all procedural irregularities are sufficient to set aside an award. The materiality to the outcome of the proceedings may
be relevant. In Chantiers de l’Atlantique SA v Gaztransport & Technigaz SAS, 99  the Commercial Court in London held that
even fraud in the arbitral proceedings would not necessarily justify setting the award aside. The court held that a witness
for Gaztransport had deliberately misled the arbitral tribunal. However, despite agreeing with the claimant on the existence
of fraud in the proceedings, the court held that the fraudulent testimony did not justify setting the award aside, because
‘even if the true position had been disclosed to the tribunal, that would, in all probability, not have affected the result of
the arbitration’. 100
(d) Substantive grounds
10. 61
Few jurisdictions permit any form of appeal on the law or facts from an international arbitral award. If the tribunal has
jurisdiction, the correct procedures are followed and the correct formalities are observed, the award—good, bad, or indifferent—
is final and binding on the parties. It matters not that the tribunal erred in its review of the evidence or misapplied the applicable
law.

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
10. 62
The question, however, arises as to whether this approach is the right one or whether there should be a greater degree of judicial
review of the merits: is it enough to ensure that the correct procedures have been observed, as the Model Law requires, or is
something more needed—ranging from correction of any mistakes of law to a complete review of the dispute—so as to ensure
that the arbitral tribunal has reached the correct decision?
(i) Mistake of law
10. 63
The argument in favour of reviewing arbitral decisions in order to guard against mistakes of law is not difficult to make.
There are obvious risks in having a legal system that leaves arbitral awards entirely free from appeal or judicial review. First,
there is the risk of inconsistent decisions as the same or similar points come before different tribunals, each one of which is
independent of the other. Such tribunals are generally unaware that the same point of law may already have been decided in
a different way by another tribunal (although this is not so in ICSID cases, in which later tribunals have decided the same
point of law differently in full knowledge of the earlier decision 101 ). This is likely to be of particular importance where the
decision turns upon the correct interpretation of a standard form clause in a widely used contract—such as the standard form
contracts used throughout the worldwide commodity, construction, shipping, insurance, or reinsurance markets, or the basic
concepts underpinning the substantive protections of investment treaties. Secondly, there is the risk that the arbitral tribunal
may not do its work as competently or as professionally as it should if its awards are not subject to substantive scrutiny, either
by an arbitral institution 102  or by a competent court.
10. 64
There are nevertheless serious disadvantages in having a system of arbitration that gives an unrestricted right of appeal
from arbitral awards. First, the decisions of national judges would effectively replace the decisions of an arbitral tribunal
specifically selected by, or on behalf of, the parties. Secondly, a party that agreed to arbitration as a private method of resolving
disputes may find itself brought unwillingly before national courts that hold their hearings in public. Thirdly, the appeal
process may be invoked simply to postpone the day on which payment is due. It is not easy to strike a balance between the
need for finality in the arbitral process and the wider public interest in some measure of judicial control, if only to ensure
consistency of decisions and predictability of the operation of the law. Internationally, however, the balance has come down
overwhelmingly in favour of finality and against judicial review of substance, except in very limited circumstances. The
Model Law sets the tone, as has been seen, when Article 5 proclaims that, ‘[i]n matters governed by this Law, no court shall
intervene except where so provided in this Law’.
10. 65
The extent of intervention by the courts on questions of law permitted by different states may be viewed as a spectrum. At
one end of the spectrum are states such as Belgium, France, and Switzerland, which exercise a very limited control over
international arbitral awards and permit parties to ‘contract out’ of control by the courts of the seat altogether. In the middle
of the scale, a large number of states have adopted (either in full or with some modifications) the limited grounds of recourse
laid down in the Model Law, which mirror the grounds for refusal of enforcement under the New York Convention. At the
other end of the spectrum are countries such as England, which operate a range of controls, including a limited right of appeal
on questions of law, which the parties may agree to waive. The examples that follow illustrate the different approaches,
including the systems adopted by some of the major countries selected as seats for international arbitration.
10. 66
The admonition in the Model Law against intervention by national courts in the process of international arbitration was
taken to extremes by Belgium, which, at one time, ‘delocalised’ international arbitration by eliminating the possibility of
setting aside an award made in Belgium when none of the parties had Belgian nationality or domicile. However, rather than
encouraging parties to select Belgium as a seat, it had the opposite effect. The experiment was abandoned and, since 1998,
recourse to the Belgian courts to set aside an award made in Belgium is once again available even for foreign nationals or
corporations, unless they expressly exclude any such application. 103
10. 67

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
France distinguishes between ‘domestic’ and ‘international’ arbitrations and does not permit appeals on points of law to its
courts from an international award. The grounds for recourse against an international award made in France are also more
limited than those set out in the Model Law, 104  being:
 
•if the arbitral tribunal wrongly upheld or declined jurisdiction;
 
•if the arbitral tribunal was not properly constituted;
 
•if the arbitral tribunal ruled without complying with the mandate conferred upon it;
 
•if due process has been violated; and/or
 
•if the recognition or enforcement is contrary to international public policy (ordre public international). 105
10. 68
Since 2011, French law has adopted the Belgian approach and permits parties to contract out of court control. 106  Indeed, it
has gone further, since it does not limit that power to parties who have no connection with France. Similarly, in Switzerland,
if none of the parties has its domicile, habitual residence, or business establishment in Switzerland, parties may agree to
exclude all setting-aside proceedings or to limit such proceedings to one or more of the grounds listed in the Act. 107
10. 69
The next group of states do not permit parties to contract out of judicial review when arbitrations have their seat in their
territory. These are the Model Law states and the United States. The judicial review of awards issued in the United States is
set out at section 10(a) of the US Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 (FAA). A court may set aside (or, in the language of the
statute, ‘vacate’) an award in the following circumstances:
 
(1)where the award was procured by corruption, fraud, or undue means;
 
(2)where there was evident partiality or corruption in the arbitrators, or [any] of them;
 
(3)where the arbitrators were guilty of misconduct in refusing to postpone the hearing, upon sufficient cause shown, or
in refusing to hear evidence pertinent and material to the controversy; or any other misbehaviour by which the rights
of any party have been prejudiced; or
 
(4)where the arbitrators exceeded their powers, or so imperfectly executed them that a mutual, final, and definite award
upon the subject matter submitted was not made. 108
10. 70
The statute does not provide expressly for any judicial review of an arbitral award on the basis of a mistake of law. Some
circuits have followed the dictum in Wilko v Swan, 109  which concluded that awards could be set aside for ‘manifest disregard
of the law’. However, US courts have now mostly taken a very restrictive view on challenging awards based on this
jurisprudential standard 110  and some circuits have rejected the doctrine in its entirety. 111  This approach can be contrasted
with the Model Law, where there is no possibility for challenging an award on the basis of mistake of law, however egregious.
10. 71
In England, a limited right to seek appeal on a point of law is preserved by section 69 of the Arbitration Act 1996, but it is
not unrestricted. First, the parties may ‘contract out’ of any right of appeal to the national court before or after the start of
arbitration proceedings. Although their agreement to do so must be in writing, the provision contained in standard form rules
of arbitration to the effect that the award shall be final and binding has been held to constitute a valid agreement to waive the
right of appeal. 112  Secondly, even if the right of appeal has been retained, it is in effect a right of appeal only on questions
of English law. 113  This is important because, given London’s position as a neutral international seat, the law governing the
substance of the dispute may well be that of another state. 114  Thirdly, the right of appeal is available only with leave of
the court, and then only if the decision of the tribunal on the question of law is ‘obviously wrong’, the question is one of
‘general public importance’, or the decision ‘is at least open to serious doubt’, so that it would be ‘just and proper in all the
circumstances for the court to determine the question’. 115  As a matter of practice, English courts have taken a restrictive
view on allowing challenges on grounds of a mistake of law. 116

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
10. 72
On an appeal on a point of English law, the English court has power to confirm the award, to vary it, to remit it to the arbitral
tribunal, or to set it aside, but the court should not set aside the award, in whole or in part, unless satisfied that it would be
inappropriate to submit the matters in question to the tribunal for reconsideration. 117  No further appeal is possible, unless
the court considers the question to be one of general importance or one that, for some special reason, should be considered
by the Court of Appeal.
(ii) Mistake of fact
10. 73
The principal justification for allowing an appeal from the award of an arbitral tribunal on questions of law is that it is in the
public interest that the law should be certain, and that, in particular, there should be consistent findings by different tribunals
as to the meaning and effect of the same legal principles or the same standard form contracts. 118  There can be no such general
interest in the findings of fact of a particular tribunal in a particular case. Accordingly, almost all states with developed laws
of arbitration refuse to allow appeals from arbitral tribunals on issues of fact. 119
10. 74
The question may then be posed: what if the parties wish to expand, by contract, the scope of the reviewing court’s powers?
This issue was addressed in the US case LaPine Technology Corporation v Kyocera Corporation, 120  in which the arbitration
clause, after providing for arbitration in accordance with the ICC Rules and the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA), went on to say:
The United States District Court for the Northern District of California may enter judgment upon any award,
either by confirming the award or by vacating, modifying or correcting the award. The Court shall vacate,
modify or correct any award: (i) based upon any of the grounds referred to in the Federal Arbitration Act, (ii)
where the arbitrators’ findings of fact are not supported by substantial evidence or (iii) where the arbitrators’
conclusions of law are erroneous.
10. 75
In the district court, Kyocera applied to modify and vacate the award, on the grounds that there were findings of fact that the
evidence did not support and that there were wrong conclusions of law. The court held that its jurisdiction was determined
by the FAA and could not be expanded by a private contract. 121  However, the Ninth Circuit overturned this decision and
allowed the appeal, holding that this agreement should be enforced. Applying the broader standards of review laid down by
the appellate court, the district court nonetheless confirmed the award. This led Kyocera to appeal again. In an en banc ruling
that has been referred to as ‘LaPine II’, 122  the Ninth Circuit then chose to revisit the issue of whether expanded review
clauses are enforceable and, in so doing, overturned its earlier decision, holding that:
[A] Federal Court may only review an arbitral decision on the grounds set forth in the [FAA]. Private parties
have no power to alter or expand those grounds, and any contractual provision purporting to do so is accordingly
legally unenforceable. 123
10. 76
For some time, there remained a difference of opinion between different US courts as to whether or not parties might expand
the scope of review. 124  However, in Hall Street Associates v Mattel, 125  the US Supreme Court confirmed that parties could
not contractually extend the scope of judicial review of an award, 126  because ‘the FAA confine[d] its expedited judicial
review to the grounds listed in 9 U. S. C. §§10 and 11’. The US Supreme Court added:
Instead of fighting the text, it makes more sense to see the three provisions, sections 9–11, as substantiating a
national policy favoring arbitration with just the limited review needed to maintain arbitration’s essential virtue
of resolving disputes straightaway. Any other reading opens the door to the full-bore legal and evidentiary
appeals that can ‘rende[r] informal arbitration merely a prelude to a more cumbersome and time-consuming

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
judicial review process,’ Kyocera, 341 F.3d, at 998; cf. Ethyl Corp. v. United Steelworkers of America, 768
F.2d 180, 184 (C.A.7 1985), and bring arbitration theory to grief in the post-arbitration process. 127
10. 77
Other jurisdictions, like Chile, have followed a different approach. For example, the Chilean Supreme Court has upheld the
disputing parties’ agreement to allow an appeal and cassation of an international award. 128  In doing so, the Chilean Supreme
Court noted that consent was the cornerstone of arbitration and that courts should uphold the parties’ intent to expand the
recourses available against an international award, even if incompatible with the provisions of the applicable law. 129
(iii) Public policy
10. 78
An arbitral award may be set aside if a national court of the place of arbitration finds (on its own initiative) that the award is
in conflict with the public policy of its own country. This is particularly true for states adopting the Model Law. 130
10. 79
Each state has its own concept of what is required by its ‘public policy’ (or ordre public, in the civil law terminology). 131  It
is possible to envisage, for example, a dispute over the division of gaming profits from a casino. The dispute may be taken to
arbitration and an award made. In many states, the underlying transaction that led to the award would be regarded as a normal
commercial transaction and the award would be regarded as valid. However, in states that outlaw gambling, the award might
well be set aside on the basis that it offends public policy.
10. 80
Most developed arbitral jurisdictions have similar conceptions of public policy. According to the Swiss Federal Supreme
Court, public policy denotes fundamental legal principles, a departure from which would be incompatible with the Swiss
legal and economic system. 132  Similarly, German courts have held that an award will violate public policy (and may thus be
set aside) if it conflicts with fundamental notions that regulate the foundations of state or economic life, or if it is in intolerable
conflict with German concepts of justice. 133
10. 81
In similar terms, the Superior Court of Justice of Ontario refused to set aside an award rendered by a North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) tribunal, holding that, for an award to offend public policy, it:
must fundamentally offend the most basic and explicit principles of justice and fairness in Ontario, or evidence
intolerable ignorance or corruption on the part of the arbitral Tribunal [ … ] The Applicant must establish that
the awards are contrary to the essential morality of Ontario. 134
In 2016, the Santiago Court of Appeals rejected an attempt to set aside an award on public policy grounds because the
arbitrators had not complied with procedural rules of judicial proceedings designed to protect due process. The court held that
the concept of public policy should be understood to reflect basic rules of justice and morality and should not be assimilated
to rules established under domestic judicial proceedings. 135
10. 82
Notwithstanding the frequent similarities between the concept of public policy in different states, there is inevitably a risk
that one state may set aside, on grounds of public policy, an award that other states would regard as valid. Even though many
states take a restrictive approach to the application of public policy, 136  the nebulous nature of the concept may be used by
courts in some jurisdictions as a licence to review the merits of a dispute inappropriately. With this in mind, the concept of
‘international public policy’ (ordre public international) has been developed to represent a higher obstacle to annulment than
purely domestic public policy. It is embodied in the French Code of Civil Procedure where an international arbitral award
may only be set aside ‘if the recognition or enforcement of the award is contrary to international public policy’. 137  Other
countries have followed this distinction such as Portugal, Chile, and Colombia. 138

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
10. 83
For arbitrations with a seat within the European Union, the notion of ‘EU public policy’ is increasingly important. The CJEU
has confirmed that EU member states must consider not only their own national public policy, but also EU public policy
when reviewing arbitral awards. 139
10. 84
If an internationally acceptable definition of ‘international public policy’ could be found, it would provide an effective
way of preventing an award in an international arbitration from being set aside for purely domestic policy considerations.
International public policy would not concern itself with matters of form, or of a purely domestic nature; rather, it would
look to the broader public interest of honesty and fair dealing. Despite the efforts of scholars and institutions to develop a
widely and accepted definition of a (truly) international public policy, a court’s assessment of this concept will typically be
influenced by the idiosyncrasies of each country and what each domestic system considers ‘international public policy’. Even
today, the warning note sounded by an English judge almost 200 years ago still resonates:
[Public policy is] a very unruly horse, and when once you get astride it you never know where it will carry you.
It may lead you from sound law. It is never argued at all, but when other points fail. 140
(iv) Summary
10. 85
This brief review demonstrates that most states are broadly content to restrict the challenge of arbitral awards to excess of
jurisdiction and lack of due process. These grounds for challenge are either adopted directly from the Model Law or reflect the
policy behind those grounds. In general, the parties are expected to abide by the decision of the tribunal, however disappointed
they may be by the outcome. Other states are prepared to offer a limited measure of judicial review on questions of law, if
this is what the parties wish—but the possibility of the review of an award on issues of fact is truly rare. 141
Footnotes
58
The full title of the Model Law is the ‘Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration’ (emphasis added). Some
states, such as Australia, Canada, Germany, or Singapore have either adopted or adapted the Model Law for both
‘international’ and ‘domestic’ arbitration.
59
See UNCITRAL website https://uncitral.un.org/en/texts/arbitration/modellaw/commercial_arbitration/status.
60
Model Law, Art. 1(2). Under Art. 6, a state that enacts the Model Law must designate the court(s) within its territory
that will fulfil the various functions entrusted to the courts.
61
Model Law, Art. 34(2).
62
Model Law, Art. 34(4). For a detailed commentary on this Article, see Holtzmann and Neuhaus, A Guide to the
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 1995), p. 967.
63
Model Law, Art. 16(3).
64
See English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 67.
65
French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1520(1).
66
Civil Procedure Code, Art. 1065(1). Case law has concluded that only a positive conclusion in favour of jurisdiction is
subject to a full review. A negative conclusion is subject to the ordinary deferential level of review. See, e.g. Manuel
Garcia et al v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, District Court of the Hague, 26 January 2021, at [14].
67
See BG Group plc v Argentine Republic, 572 US 25, 134 S.Ct. 1198 (2014).
68
See, e.g., Arab National Bank v El Sharif Saoud Bin Masoud Bin Haza’a El-Abdali [2004] EWHC 2381; Republic of
Kazakhstan v Istil Group Inc. [2004] Eng Comm QBD 579, in which an award was set aside based on the Republic
of Kazakhstan not having been a party to the relevant arbitration agreement. See also Kabab-Ji v Kout Food Group
(cour d’appel de Paris, 23 June 2020, Case No. 17/22942), in which, in an ICC arbitration with its seat in Paris, the

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
tribunal determined that it had jurisdiction over a non-signatory to the arbitration agreement. The non-signatory losing
party challenged the award, alleging that the underlying contract was governed by English law, which should have led
to the tribunal to decline jurisdiction. The cour d’appel de Paris rejected the challenge finding that, regardless of the law
governing the contract, the law of the seat is applicable to the arbitration clause in the absence of an agreement on the
contrary, and thus a non-signatory of an arbitration agreement governed by French law may be compelled to arbitrate.
In another case, the cour d’appel de Paris partially annulled an arbitral award that had declined jurisdiction to hear a
dispute involving four non-signatory parties. The Court held that two of the four non-signatory parties had knowledge
of the arbitration agreement and were directly involved in the performance of the contract and were therefore bound to
arbitrate any dispute arising from that contract. cour d’appel de Paris, 18 December 2018, Case No. 16/24924.
69
Judgment of the Higher Regional Court of Frankfurt, 18 December 2014.
70
Case C-284/16 Slovak Republic v Achmea BV, 6 March 2018.
71
See the ZPO, s. 1059(2)(1)(a).
72
German Federal Supreme Court (BGH) Decision of 31 October 2018.
73
The number of new awards under intra-EU BITs will be restricted by the Agreement for the Termination of all Intra-
EU BITs signed by 23 Member States of the European Union on 5 May 2020, following the decision in Achmea. The
Agreement entered into force on 29 August 2020.
74
See, e.g. the decision of the UK Supreme Court in Micula and ors v Romania [2020] UKSC 5, at [84]–[86] where it
held that the UK’s obligations under the ICSID Convention were not impacted by its obligations under the TFEU.
75
See Liebscher, The Healthy Award: Challenge in International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International,
2003), ch. V(6).
76
Paris Lapeyre v Sauvage [2001] Rev Arb 806, n. Derains.
77
For example, in BLB and anor v BLC and ors, the Singapore High Court set aside an award on infra petita grounds. In that
case, the respondent BLC had originally advanced a counterclaim, but the tribunal omitted to decide the counterclaim
after wrongfully characterising it as a substantive defence to liability. The High Court annulled the award finding that the
tribunal had failed to exercise its powers and that the infra petita doctrine applied. See Tan and Ahmad, ‘The UNCITRAL
Model Law and awards infra petita’ (2014) 31(3) J Intl Arb 413, at 414–415.
78
See the Netherlands Arbitration Act 2015, s. 1065, for an example of a national system permitting a challenge to the
entire award for an infra petita decision. But note that where the parties have discovered that the arbitral tribunal omitted
to decide an issue before it, an additional award must first have been applied for and rejected before there is an admissible
ground for setting aside: s. 1065(6). However, certain countries, such as Belgium and France, do not allow a challenge to
an award on the basis that a tribunal has not ruled on certain issues. See Belgian Arbitration Law 2013, s. 1717(3); French
Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1502(3). See also Meijer, ‘Concluding Remarks’, in Cooper, Gerbay, Kühner, Goldman,
and Van Rompaey (eds) Annulment and Enforcement of Arbitral Awards from a Comparative Law Perspective, (Wolters
Kluwer, 2018) pp. 107-131, at 129. The Model Law, Art. 33(3), may provide the answer to this problem, in that, at the
request of a party, the arbitral tribunal may make an additional award where claims have not been dealt with in the award.
79
See Chapter 2.
80
Model Law, Art. 34(2)(b)(i). See, e.g., Belgian Arbitration Law 2013, s. 1676(5), providing that certain categories of
labour disputes are not arbitrable, and that any arbitration agreement relating to such disputes shall be null and void.
81
For example, in France, limits to arbitrability are set by French concepts of international public policy. In other countries
such as the United States, Germany, and China, those limits are set by mandatory rules (lois de police). See, e.g., Kleiman
and Pauly, ‘Arbitrability and public policy challenges’, in Rowley (ed.) The Guide to Challenging and Enforcing
Arbitration Awards (Global Arbitration Review, 2019), pp. 33-42.
82
La société de droit grec X. v la SPRL Y. et A.K., Court of First Instance of Brussels, Case Nos 2014/480/A and
2015/6305/A, 29 January 2016 and 12 April 2018. In Reliance Industries Ltd & Anor v The Union of India [2018]
EWHC 822 (Comm), the English High Court considered nine challenges to a final partial award, in which the majority of
an arbitral tribunal, inter alia, had declined jurisdiction to hear a claim relating to the decision of the Indian government
to withhold certain payments to its private counterparty. Challenge 6 concerned the arbitrability of the claim based on
this government act. The Court found that ‘[t]he jurisdiction being conferred on the tribunal is to decide disputes in
accordance with the relevant principles of law which are applicable, and if the relevant applicable principles of private
international law make some issues non-justiciable, they form just as much a part of the body of legal rules which the
state is asking the tribunal to apply’.
83
The requirement of equality is a specific requirement of some laws: see, e.g., Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, s. 190. The Swiss
courts, however, have adopted an increasingly restrictive approach to equality and, in particular, the right to be heard, to
the extent that, in 2019, the Swiss Federal Supreme Court determined that a violation of the right to be heard warranted
annulment only if its violation was determinative to the outcome of the procedure. See Gabriel and Schregenberger,
‘The new Swiss approach to the right to be heard—Balancing challenging fairness and efficiency concerns’ (2019) III(2)

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
Indian Journal of Arbitration Law 48. See also Sara Errani v International Tennis Federation and CAS, Case BGE
4A_424/2018, Decision of the Swiss Supreme Court, 29 January 2019. Other courts have been less strict. For example,
in two parallel cases Hui v Esposito Holdings [2017] FCA 648 and [2017] FCA 728, an Australian court observed that a
party must prove that the procedural breach resulted in real unfairness or real practical injustice, leading to a possibility
that the arbitration may have had a different outcome.
84
See, e.g., the kinds of ‘serious irregularity’ referred to in the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 68(1)-(3). The English
view is that there must be an irregularity of a specified kind and that the court must consider that the irregularity has
caused or will cause substantial injustice: Shore and Carey, ‘Procedural irregularity: Setting aside or remitting awards
under English and Irish law—A comparative assessment’ (2005) Intl ALR 58.
85
See, e.g., Decision of 7 January 2004, Case No. 4P_196/2003 (2004) 3 ASA Bulletin 592, in which the Swiss Federal
Supreme Court held that there was no absolute right for a party to hear a witness orally or to ask questions to witnesses
who the arbitrators had refused to hear. See also, e.g., Decision of 1 July 2004, Case No. 4P_93/2004 (2005) 1 ASA
Bulletin 139, in which the Swiss Federal Tribunal Supreme Court held that the mere violation of a procedural rule was
not sufficient to have an award set aside. In England, see, e.g., Lesotho Highlands Development Authority v Impregilo
SpA and ors [2005] 3 WLR 129, in which the House of Lords (now the UK Supreme Court) confirmed the exceptional
nature of the remedy available for serious irregularity under the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 68. With respect to
Hong Kong, see, e.g., Grand Pacific Holdings Ltd v Pacific China Holdings Ltd, CACV 136/2011, 19 February 2013,
in which the Court of Final Appeal affirmed the Court of Appeal’s decision that the procedural irregularities alleged by
the losing party were not ‘egregious’ enough to warrant annulment.
86
See Parsons Whittemore Overseas Co. Inc. v Société Générale de l’Industrie du Papier (RAKTA), 508 F.2d 969 (2d
Cir. 1974).
87
See, e.g., the decision of the cour d’appel de Paris in Burkinabe des Ciments et Matérieux (CIMAT) v Société des Ciments
d’Abidjan (SCA) [2001] Rev Arb 165, n. Cohen. See also Gouvernement de la République arabe d’Egypte v Société
Malicorp Ltd, Cass. Civ., Ch. Civ. 1ere, 23 June 2010, [2011] Rev Arb 446; France Telecom-Orange FCR v Equatorial
Guinea, cour d’appel de Paris, 22 September 2015, Case No. 14/17200 and Société Strube GmbH & Co. KG v Société
SESVanderHave, Case No. 15/17/137, in which the French court set aside the award because it was based on legal
grounds or documents not raised with the parties. See also Fleetwood Wanderers Ltd. (t/a Fleetwood Town Football
Club) v AFC Fylde Ltd. [2018] EWHC 3318 (Comm), in which the English High Court set aside the award on the basis
that the tribunal had rendered its award on grounds not raised by parties. See also RJ and ors v HB [2018] EWHC
2833 (Comm). In turn, see Terna Bahrain Holding Co. v Ali Marzook Ali Bin Kamil Al Shamsi ors [2012] EWHC 3283
(Comm), in which the London High Court dismissed the challengers’ contention that the arbitrator had engaged in a
serious irregularity of procedure under the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 68 by deciding the case on a basis allegedly
not advanced by a party. According to Popplewell J, at [85]: ‘Relief under section 68 will only be appropriate where the
tribunal has gone so wrong in its conduct of the arbitration, and where its conduct is so far removed from what could
reasonably be expected from the arbitral process, that justice calls out for it to be corrected.’ The court found that no
such situation existed in that case.
88
For example, in some common law systems, it is usual for lawyers to interview witnesses and take statements from
them before the hearing—a practice that may be frowned upon (and, indeed, regarded as a breach of professional
ethics) in other countries. A recent industry survey identified what was labelled as ‘due process paranoia’ in reference
to the reluctance of tribunals to act decisively on certain issues for fear of an award being challenged for violations
of due process. See Sharma, ‘Due process “paranoia”: Turning away from judicial attitudes and looking for answers
within’ (2018) 84(4) Arbitration: The International Journal of Arbitration, Mediation and Dispute Management 314.
89
Berger, ‘Art. 15 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: The eternal conflict between arbitral discretion and the parties’ due
process rights’ (2006) 21 Mealey’s Intl Arb Rep 29: ‘It will ultimately rest on the arbitrators to reconcile the procedural
rules with the mandatory rules of due process in order to ensure the integrity of the award.’
90
Of particular note, the 2016 UNCITRAL Notes, discussed in Chapter 6, should assist in establishing common and
acceptable procedures.
91
See ‘Right to a Physical Hearing Project: The Release of 20 New Reports Reinforces Core Trends and Important
Divergences,’ ICCA, 18 March 2021.
92
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Rome, 4 November 1950) (as amended).
93
BEG SpA v Italy (Case 5212/11), Judgment of 20 May 2021.
94
For other examples, in two decisions from 2018 and 2019, the ECtHR held that a party did not waive the protections
of Art. 6 ECHR in cases of compulsory arbitration, such as in the CAS Arbitration Rules. See Mutu and Pechstein v
Switzerland, Cases Nos 40575/10 and 67474/10, 2 October 2018, para. 115; Ali Riza and others v Turkey, Cases Nos.
30226/10, 17880/11, 17887/11, 17891/11 and 5506/16, 175–177, 181, 28 January 2020.

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
95
For a thorough analysis of the interaction between human rights (including Art. 6 ECHR) and international
arbitration, see Benedettelli, ‘Human rights as a litigation tool in international arbitration: reflecting on the ECHR
experience’ (2015) 31 Arb Intl 631.
96
See Model Law, Art. 34(2)(a)(iv). But note that the Belgian Arbitration Law of 2013 limits the Model Law’s grounds
for challenge. Under the Model Law, an award may be set aside if the procedure deviates from that agreed upon by the
parties; under Belgian law, the award may be set aside only if that deviation was so significant that it actually affected
the outcome.
97
Société Saad Buzwair Automotive Co. v Société Audi Volkswagen Middle East Fze LLC, Case No. 18-15755, Decision
of the cour de cassation of 3 October 2019.
98
Eiser Infrastructure Limited and Energía Solar Luxembourg Sarl v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/36,
Decision of Ad Hoc Committee, 11 June 2020.
99
[2011] EWHC 3383.
100
Ibid., at [369]. (The English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 68 allows, but does not require, a court to set aside an award on the
grounds of ‘serious irregularity’, including where an award is ‘obtained by fraud’.) A different position was endorsed
by a Hong Kong court in Z v Y [2018] HKCFI 2342, in which the court annulled an arbitral award on the basis that the
arbitral tribunal failed to properly address the party’s allegation that the arbitration had arisen from fraudulent contracts.
101
This is because ICSID awards (unlike other awards) are nearly always published.
102
Whilst the ICC Rules, Art. 34, provide for the scrutiny of an award by the ICC Court before the award is finalised and
issued to the parties, it is principally as to form and not substance.
103
Belgian Judicial Code, art. 1718, as amended in 2013. Belgium internationalised its legislation on arbitration when it
adopted the Model Law in 2013. In addition to the grounds provided for in the Model Law, the 2013 Belgian Arbitration
Law includes three additional grounds to set aside an award: failure to state reasons (art. 1717.3(a)(iv)), excess of powers
(art. 1717.3(a)(vi)), and obtaining an award by fraud (art. 1717.3(b)(iii)).
104
Compare arts 1518ff of the French Code of Civil Procedure (incorporating the French 2011 Arbitration Law) with the
Model Law, Art. 34.
105
See French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1520. Recently, the French courts have clarified further the grounds for
annulment by distinguishing between mistakes of law in decisions on jurisdiction—which are challengeable—from
mistakes of law on questions of admissibility—which are not. See Jnah Development SAL v Marriott International
Hotels Inc., Case No. 16-21.391, Decision of the French cour de cassation, January 2018, p. 3.
106
See French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1522 (‘By way of a specific agreement the parties may, at any time, expressly
waive their right to bring an action to set aside’).
107
Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, s. 192(1).
108
There is a possibility of the award being remitted to the arbitrators, where the time within which the award was to be
made has not expired: FAA, § 10(b).
109
346 US 427, 74 S.Ct. 182 (1953). In Shanghai Foodstuffs Import & Export Corporation v International Chemical, Inc.,
Case No. 99 CV 3320, 2004 US Dist. LEXIS 1423 (SDNY, 2004), it was acknowledged that US courts had the authority
to set aside non-domestic awards that were rendered in the United States on the basis of ‘manifest disregard of the law’.
110
See, e.g., Hall Street Associates, LLC v Mattel, Inc., 552 US 576 (2008) and Beraudo, ‘Egregious error of law as grounds
for setting aside an arbitral award’ (2006) 23 J Intl Arb 351.
111
However, the Second Circuit has held that the doctrine survives as valid (though narrow) ground for challenge. See
Citigroup Global Markets v Bacon, 562 F.3d 349, 350 (5th Cir. 2009): ‘ Hall Street restricts the grounds for vacatur to
those set forth in § 10 of the FAA, and consequently manifest disregard of the law is no longer an independent ground for
vacating arbitral awards’; Goldman Sachs Execution & Clearing v Official Unsecured Creditors Committee of Bayou
Group, 491 Fed. Appx 201, 2012 US App. LEXIS 13531, 3-4 (2012). See also Zurich Am. Ins. Co. v Team Tankers AS,
811 F.3d 584, 589 (2d Cir. 2016) finding that a challenge on the basis of manifest disregard of law imposes a ‘heavy
burden’ on the applicant.
112
See, e.g., Sanghi Polyesters Ltd v The International Investor (KCFC) [2001] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 480. See also Lesotho
Highlands Development Authority v Impreglio SpA and ors [2005] UKHL 43, at [3] per Lord Steyn, in which it was
held that the ICC Rules, Art. 28.6 (now the ICC Rules, Art. 35.6) excluded a right of challenge.
113
English Arbitration Act 1996, ss 69(1) and 82(1). The underlying policy of the English legislators was related to the long-
established tradition of arbitration by non-lawyers in certain commercial sectors, e.g. the construction industry or trading
in commodities, and the need for certainty regarding the way in which standard form clauses were to be interpreted.
114
See, e.g., AEK v National Basket Association [2002] 1 All ER (Comm) 70, in which permission to appeal on a point of
law under s. 69 was rejected because it related to the arbitrator’s application of Greek law.
115
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 69(2) and (3). See, e.g., MRI Trading v Erdenet Mining [2013] EWCA 156, in which
a London Metal Exchange tribunal held that a sale contract was an unenforceable agreement to agree, whilst ignoring

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
the provision requiring that the contract be construed together with a separate settlement agreement, which was the quid
pro quo for the sale contract. The Court of Appeal determined that this was obviously wrong as a matter of English law
and annulled the award. See also Martin & ors v Harris [2019] EWHC 1962 (Ch).
116
For a comprehensive discussion, see Sutton, Gill, and Gearing (eds) Russell on Arbitration (24th edn, Sweet & Maxwell,
2015), paras 8-132-8.170.
117
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 69(7).
118
For example, the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 69(3)(c)(ii), which provides that one of the requirements for leave to
appeal is that the question of law is ‘one of general public importance’.
119
See, e.g., Edman Controls, Inc., 712 F.3d 1021, 1024-1025 (7th Cir. 2013), upholding the district court’s judgment that
‘neither factual nor legal error is a sufficient ground for vacatur’, and adding that the Court ‘will not overturn an award
because an arbitrator committed serious error’ or the decision is ‘incorrect or even whacky’, quoting Wise v Wachovia,
86 F.3d 96, 100 (7th Cir. 1996).
120
130 F.3d 884 (9th Cir. 1997).
121
LaPine, 909 F.Supp. 697 (Cal. 1995).
122
Kyocera Corporation v Prudential-Bache Trade Services Inc., 341 F.3d 987 (9th Cir. 2003).
123
Ibid., at 988.
124
See, e.g., Gateway Tech. Inc. v MCI Telecomms Corporation, 64 F.3d 993 (5th Cir. 1995), enforcing a provision requiring
the review of arbitral awards for errors of law; Bowen v Amoco Pipeline Co., 254 F.3d 925 (10th Cir. 2001), declining
to enforce a provision providing for expanded review. See also Fellas, ‘The scope of judicial review of arbitration
awards’ (2003) 230 New York LJ 1.
125
Hall Street Associates, LLC v Mattel, Inc, 552 US 576 (2008), at [19].
126
Suskin, ‘The rejection of contractually expanded judicial review under the Arbitration Act in Hall Street v Mattel
(06-989)’ (2008) 23 Mealey’s Intl Arb Rep 1.
127
Hall Street, at 1405.
128
See Case No. 19568-2020, CCF Sudamérica, Supreme Court of Chile, 16 January 2020.
129
Ibid. In this case, the arbitration agreement provided for international arbitration seated in Santiago. Once the dispute
arose, the parties agreed that the final award could be challenged through appeal and cassation. The losing party appealed
the final award before the Appellate Court of Santiago, which dismissed the appeal noting that the only recourse against
an international award under Chilean law was annulment. The Supreme Court reversed the lower court’s judgment
finding that (i) courts should base their decision on the parties’ intention with respect to the arbitration agreement; (ii) a
party could not oppose the appeal of an award if it had previously agreed that the award would be subject to such appeal;
and (iii) laws limiting the recourses available to a disputing party should be interpreted narrowly, thus favouring the
disputing parties’ rights to appeal over the formalities that limit the available recourses to ‘appeal’. Case No. 19568-2020,
Supreme Court of Chile, 16 January 2020, at [5–6], [8].
130
Model Law, Art. 34(2)(b)(ii). Public policy is also discussed in the context of the recognition and enforcement of awards
in Chapter 11.
131
For example, while in the United States, public policy is understood in this context as the ‘most basic notions of morality
and justice’, in Egypt they are the rules aimed at achieving any political, social, or economic public interest, which can
be procedural or substantive. See Selim, ‘Egyptian public policy as a ground for annulment and refusal of enforcement
of arbitral awards’ (2016) 3(1) BCDR International Arbitration Review 65. At the other end of the scale is Saudi Arabia,
where an award is contrary to public policy if contrary to Islamic law (see Saudi Arbitration Law, art. 50.2) and Japan,
where courts have found that procedural irregularities—if serious enough—may amount to violations of public policy.
Heisei 21 (Chu) No. 6, Tokyo District Court (13 June 2011), published in Hanrei Jiho No. 2128, at 58. See also Abnaa
Al-Khalaf Co. et al. v Sayed Aghajaved Raza, Challenge No. 64, Qatari Court of Cassation (2012), setting aside a Qatari
award on grounds of public order, since it was not issued in the name of His Highness the Emir of the State of Qatar.
132
See, e.g., Özmak Makina Ve Elektrik Anayi AS v Voest Apline Industrieanlagenbau GmBH and anor, Case No.
4P_143/2001, Decision of the Swiss Federal Supreme Court, 18 September 2001 (2002) 20 ASA Bulletin 311. See also
Francelino da Silva Matuzalem v Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), Case No. 4A_558/2011,
Decision of the Swiss Supreme Court, 27 March 2012, in which the Swiss Supreme Court held that the restriction of
a person’s economic freedom violated public policy. The case involved a FIFA arbitration in which a football player,
who had repeatedly violated his FIFA obligations, was banned from participating in any football-related activity until
the full amount that he owed the organisation was paid.
133
Federal Court of Justice, Order of the court dated 25 June 2020, File No. I ZB 108/19 (NJOZ 2020, p 1500, at [13]).
134
United Mexican States v Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa, File No. 03-CV-23500, Ontario Superior Court of Justice, 3
December 2003, at [87].

Section C. - Grounds for Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638667 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
135
See Ingeniería Proyersa Limitada v Steag GMBH (Court of Appeals of Santiago) 1 September 2016, Case 2685-2016.
136
See, e.g., the English courts in Protech Projects Construction (Pty) Ltd v Al-Kharafi & Sons [2005] EWHC 2165
(Comm), in which Langley J stressed that s. 68(2)(g) of the English Arbitration Act 1996 would be available only
in extreme cases and that the court would not be concerned with the correctness or otherwise of the award: public
policy under English law could be invoked only where the alleged conduct is akin to something ‘unconscionable or
reprehensible’ and where the applicant had suffered ‘substantial injustice’.
137
French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1520 (emphasis added). In SA Ancienne Maison Marcel Bauche v Indagro, cour
d’appel de Paris, 27 September 2016, , Case No. 15/12.614, the court held that it would refuse enforcement of an arbitral
award on public policy grounds only where the award violated international public policy in a ‘manifest, effective and
concrete’ manner. See also Republic of Kirgizstan v Mr. Valeriy, cour d’appel de Paris, 21 February 2017, Case No.
15/01.650; Democratic Republic of Congo v Customs and Tax Consultancy LLC, cour d’appel de paris, 16 May 2017,
Case No. 15/17.442. French courts have found a violation of international public policy to exist where the tribunal denied
the parties due process by failing to invite comments from them in connection with the award of damages Commercial
Caribbean Niquel v Societe Overseas Mining Investments Ltd, cour d’appel de Paris, 25 March 2010, Case No. 08/23901
or where a company has procured a contract for the exploitation of natural resources through fraud: (MK Group v S.A.R.L.
Onix, cour d’appel de Paris, 16 January 2018, Case No. 15/21.703) or corruption (Alstom Transport SA v Alexander
Brothers Ltd, cour d’appel de Paris, 28 May 2019, Case No. 16/11182; Sorelec v Lybia, cour d’appel de Paris, 17
November 2020, Case Nos 18/0737 and 18/02568).
138
For example, Portugal has a similar provision at the 2013 Code of Civil Procedure, art. 980(f), which refers to ‘the
principles of international public policy of the Portuguese State’. See also the decision of the Court of Appeals of
Santiago, holding that international arbitral awards rendered in Chile are not subject to all mandatory provisions that
are part of domestic public policy. Court of Appeals of Santiago, Docket No. 3390-2017, 5 October 2016. A similar
reasoning is found in the decision of the Colombian Supreme Court in HM P2, HTM LLC v Fomento de Catalizadores
—FOCA S.A.S., SC8453-2016, 24 June 2016, rejecting a challenge because a mandatory rule in the Colombian Code of
Commerce was deemed domestic public policy and not international public policy.
139
See, e.g., Case C-40/80 Asturcom Telecomunicaciones SL v Cristina Rodriguez Nogueira [2009] ECR I-9579; Bermann,
‘Navigating EU law and the law of international arbitration’ (2012) 28 Arb Intl 397. Also see paragraph 10.39 above for
the discussion of the implications of EU public policy on the validity of arbitration agreements in intra-EU investment
treaties.
140
Richardson v Mellish (1824) 2 Bing 229, at 252, [1824–34] All ER 258, per Burrough J.
141
A 2016 analysis of industry practitioners confirmed that it is relatively unlikely to succeed in a challenge of an award
before the courts of England and Wales, France, Singapore, and the United States. See Carter and Macpherson, ‘Arbitral
awards—Challenging to challenge’ (2016) 1(19) Intl Arb L Rev 89. In the case of England and Wales, e.g., a minute
of the Commercial Court User Group Meeting confirmed that ‘very few’ challenges under the English Arbitration
Act 1996 succeeded, with a renowned retired judge ‘express[ing] hope that parties were hearing the message that the
hurdle for these applications is high’. See Commercial Court User Group Meeting of November 2020. In Switzerland,
although successful challenges to awards have increased, they are still low. Between 2008 and December 2015, seventeen
challenges were successful as opposed to the thirteen challenges that were successful between 1989 and 2007. Yet,
despite this trend, the success rate is still around 7 per cent for non-sports arbitration awards and around 10 per cent
for sports awards, for an overall average of 8 per cent as of December 2015. See Dasser and Wójtowicz, ‘Challenges
of Swiss arbitral awards—Updated and extended statistical data as of 2015’ (2016) 34 ASA Bulletin, Swiss Arbitration
Association 4–5.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
