Establishing the Initial Procedure and Procedural Timetable..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Establishing the Initial Procedure and Procedural Timetable and
establishing the facts of the case (arts 24 and 25)
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Establishing the Initial Procedure and Procedural Timetable and establishing the facts of the case (arts 24 and 25)
22-83
The Tribunal is required to conduct a case management conference and establish a procedural timetable in accordance with
art.24. This requires a Tribunal to submit case management proposals prior to or during the case management conference. If a
Tribunal were to unilaterally impose a procedure and procedural timetable without such consultation, a party may well argue
that it has not been given an adequate opportunity to present its case.
22-84
With respect to the initial case management conference and the preparation of the procedural timetable, a number of basic
issues often arise, although in many instances they can be resolved by agreement during the case management conference. The
most basic relates to the overall length of the proceedings. In some instances, a party demands that the procedural timetable
be established to render an award within the six-month period after the signing of the Terms of Reference as provided for in
art.31(1) and the other party objects that it would not have a reasonable chance to present its case. In most ICC cases, the
Tribunal will accept the objection unless there is a requirement under the arbitration agreement that the arbitration be completed
within six months.
22-85
Other matters dealt with at the initial case management conference frequently relate to the time period required for initial
submissions, the timing of documentary requests and the date and length of the hearings.
22-86
Set out in Pt II is a model of a typical procedural timetable for an ICC arbitration. In addition, it is normal in an ICC arbitration
to use the IBA Rules on Evidence as guidelines as to how an international arbitration should be conducted. An ICC arbitration
should be adapted to the circumstances of the case. However, to the extent that a party makes procedural requests that are
inconsistent with what one would normally expect in an ICC arbitration, the party has the burden of demonstrating that these
requests are necessary in order for it to provide the party with an opportunity to reasonably present its case. 270
22-87
As regards the details of how documentary disclosure is to be carried out, the use of witness statements and expert reports
and the conduct of hearings, considerable guidance is provided in the IBA Rules on Evidence discussed in detail under art.25.
Again, each case is individual, but if a Tribunal deals with such issues in a manner consistent with the IBA Rules on Evidence,
it is difficult to see how a party can maintain that it has not been provided with a reasonable opportunity to present its case.
In practice, to anchor the IBA Rules on Evidence as part of the procedure, the Terms of Reference frequently provide that the
Tribunal will consider the IBA Rules on Evidence in dealing with procedural issues but will not be bound by them. In the
authors’ view, the ICC material and the soft law as to the conduct of ICC arbitrations in particular provide a form of safe harbour
as to the overall conduct of the arbitration. In practice, the authors have seldom seen objections to the initial procedure as such
but rather to changes to the procedure, claims and requests for relief.

Establishing the Initial Procedure and Procedural Timetable..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
270
Other matters that frequently are not accepted is if a party insists on having a lawyer or law firm represent the party and
that lawyer is unavailable either to prepare submissions or to conduct the hearing.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
