Procedure to be followed, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406920 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Procedure to be followed
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Procedure to be followed
28-19
Article 28(1) refers to a request of a party for conservatory or interim measures but does not provide any guidance as to the
procedure that should be used by the Tribunal. As regards the timing, given the substantive issues discussed below, it is important
that any application for conservatory or interim measures be made as soon as possible.
28-20
As regards the application itself, usually, a party making a request for a conservatory or interim measure will set out the terms
of the application with the legal and factual basis therefore and provide the evidentiary support for that application by way of
documents. The party may, in addition, file one or more witness statements. Depending on the nature and urgency of the matter,
the applying party may ask that, pending a final decision on the conservatory or interim measure, the Tribunal order the other
party not to take any action that would render such relief ineffective. This is particularly the case where there is to be a hearing
regarding the application for conservatory or interim relief. 473
28-21
Except in the extraordinary case of an ex parte application discussed above, the other party will be provided with an opportunity
to make a filing in response, setting out its legal and factual arguments and providing documents and in some cases witness
statements on which it relies. As regards maintaining the status quo pending the hearing on interim relief, the applicant often
asks for an immediate undertaking from the opposing party with an application for an order from the Tribunal to maintain the
status quo pending the decision on the interim measure.
28-22
Depending on the importance of the issue there may also be a second round of filings on the application and the Tribunal
will decide on whether there should be a hearing with respect to the issue. If the Tribunal is proposing to issue an award with
respect to the measure, then pursuant to art.26(1) it is necessary to hold a hearing unless the parties waive that requirement
(although that hearing may now be held virtually rather than in person). 474  In many instances, these measures are viewed as
very important by the parties and therefore it is desirable to have a hearing in person, although such matters may also be dealt
with in telephone or video conferences, where appropriate. If the Tribunal determines that a witness statement is material to
the outcome of the application, to meet the requirements of due process, the Tribunal is required on request to provide a party
with a chance to cross-examine the witness.
28-23
As discussed in art.22(4), the Tribunal must generally deliberate in a collegial fashion with respect to the decision as to whether
to grant or reject the measures applied for. 475  In the absence of unanimity, the decision may be made by the majority or, if
there is no majority, by the president of the Tribunal in accordance with art.32(1) which is applicable expressly to awards and
by implication to reasoned procedural orders.
Footnotes
473
This was the procedure for example in In ICC Case No.16918 referred to above at para.28-17.

Procedure to be followed, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406920 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
474
For a discussion on virtual hearings, see para.26-15 and following.
475
The Terms of Reference usually provide that a procedural order may be issued by the president of the Tribunal alone
and, in some instances, provide that the president of the Tribunal may issue certain procedural orders without consulting
the other members of the Tribunal. However, such provisions permitting the president of the Tribunal to act alone are
generally limited to extensions and do not—and should not—extend to dealing with substantive measures such as the
granting of interim or conservatory relief.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
