Principles used by Tribunals to determine the applicable law, UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Principles used by Tribunals to determine the applicable law
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Principles used by Tribunals to determine the applicable law
21-26
The determination of the applicable law in the absence of an agreement between the parties is subject to some uncertainty, in
part because any proposed solution is based on an assumed starting point and in part because art.21(1) provides for discretion
but does not prescribe a solution.
21-27
A Tribunal has several possible approaches to determine the applicable law in the absence of a choice by the parties. One
approach is for the Tribunal to consider which national legal system should be applicable and then to apply the conflict of law
rules system or a particular rule of that national system. The second approach is to determine the potential national conflicts
of law system that are applicable and to try to determine whether those systems provide any solution. The third approach is
to use the closest connection test, which is in fact found in many legal systems. The fourth approach, which is provided for in
art.21(1), is for the Tribunal to use the voie directe to determine the applicable national law based on criteria that the Tribunal
would usually take from a traditional conflicts of law system. 127
21-28
Traditionally, some arbitrators have looked to the law of the place of arbitration and used the conflicts of law principles of that
country to determine the applicable law. This approach has fallen into disfavour due to the general acceptance that the place of
arbitration may often have no relationship with the parties or the dispute. 128  In some instances, Tribunals have considered the
law of the place of incorporation of the parties. However, this frequently gives rise to a conflict that can only be resolved by
examining the common principles of conflicts of law in the various relevant national jurisdictions.
21-29
The implicit reference in art.21(1) to the voie directe reflects the trend to seek to avoid the issues relating to national conflict of
law systems. It appears that this tendency has been reinforced by a more generalised acceptance of the principle of the closest
connection as reflected in Swiss and EU law. In European Union Countries, the Rome I Regulation sets out general rules that
are applicable throughout the EU and which are referred to in ICC arbitration as reflecting general principles of conflict of
laws. 129  Article 4 of the Rome I Regulation deals with the applicable law in the absence of choice as follows:
“Applicable law in the absence of choice”
 
“1.To the extent that the law applicable to the contract has not been chosen in accordance with Article 3 and
without prejudice to Articles 5 to 8, the law governing the contract shall be determined as follows:
 
(a)a contract for the sale of goods shall be governed by the law of the country where the seller has his
habitual residence;
 
(b)a contract for the provision of services shall be governed by the law of the country where the service
provider has his habitual residence;
 
(c)a contract relating to a right in rem in immovable property or to a tenancy of immovable property
shall be governed by the law of the country where the property is situated;

Principles used by Tribunals to determine the applicable law, UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(d)notwithstanding point (c), a tenancy of immovable property concluded for temporary private use for
a period of no more than six consecutive months shall be governed by the law of the country where
the landlord has his habitual residence, provided that the tenant is a natural person and has his habitual
residence in the same country;
 
(e)a franchise contract shall be governed by the law of the country where the franchisee has his habitual
residence;
 
(f)a distribution contract shall be governed by the law of the country where the distributor has his habitual
residence;
 
(g)a contract for the sale of goods by auction shall be governed by the law of the country where the
auction takes place, if such a place can be determined;
 
(h)a contract concluded within a multilateral system which brings together or facilitates the bringing
together of multiple third-party buying and selling interests in financial instruments, as defined by Article
4(1), point (17) of Directive 2004/39/EC, in accordance with non-discretionary rules and governed by
a single law, shall be governed by that law.
 
2.Where the contract is not covered by paragraph 1 or where the elements of the contract would be covered
by more than one of points (a) to (h) of paragraph 1, the contract shall be governed by the law of the country
where the party required to effect the characteristic performance of the contract has his habitual residence.
 
3.Where it is clear from all the circumstances of the case that the contract is manifestly more closely connected
with a country other than that indicated in paragraphs 1 or 2, the law of that other country shall apply.
 
4.Where the law applicable cannot be determined pursuant to paragraphs 1 or 2, the contract shall be governed
by the law of the country with which it is most closely connected.”
21-30
One of the most important features of art.4 of the Rome I Regulation is the list of factors in art.4(2). The Giuliano-Lagarde
Report prepared in connection with the Rome Convention 130  includes helpful comments regarding those factors:
 
“3.According to Article 4(2), it is presumed that the contract has the closest connection with the country
in which the party who is to effect the performance which is characteristic of the contract has his habitual
residence at the time when the contract is concluded, or, in the case of a body corporate or unincorporate,
its central administration. …
The submission of the contract, in the absence of a choice by the parties, to the law appropriate to the
characteristic performance defines the connecting factor of the contract from the inside, and not from the
outside by elements unrelated to the essence of the obligation such as the nationality of the contracting parties
or the place where the contract was concluded. … As for the geographical location of the characteristic
performance, it is quite natural that the country in which the party liable for the performance is habitually
resident or has his central administration (if a body corporate or unincorporate) or his place of business,
according to whether the performance in question is in the course of his trade or profession or not, should
prevail over the country of performance where, of course, the latter is a country other than that of habitual
residence, central administration or the place of business. In the solution adopted by the Group the position
is that only the place of habitual residence or of the central administration or of the place of business of the
party providing the essential performance is decisive in locating the contract. Thus, for example, in a banking
contract the law of the country of the banking establishment with which the transaction is made will normally
govern the contract. It is usually the case in a commercial contract of sale that the law of the vendor’s place
of business will govern the contract. To take another example, in an agency contract concluded in France
between a Belgian commercial agent and a French company, the characteristic performance being that of the

Principles used by Tribunals to determine the applicable law, UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
agent, the contract will be governed by Belgian law if the agent has his place of business in Belgium. … For
each category of contract it is the characteristic performance that is in principle the relevant factor in applying
the presumption for determining the applicable law, even in situations peculiar to certain contracts, as for
example in the contract of guarantee where the characteristic performance is always that of the guarantor,
whether in relation to the principal debtor or the creditor.”
21-31
These principles apply to contracts in general, but do not apply to arbitration agreements under art.1(2)(e) of the Rome I
Regulation. However, the exclusion relates to the arbitration agreement and not the relevant contract as a whole. 131
21-32
Therefore, as regards the rules of law applicable to the merits, the existence of an arbitration clause does not prevent the Rome
I Regulation from being applicable to the provisions other than the arbitration clause. Moreover, the reference to the principle
of the closest connection in the Rome I Regulation is probably one of the main principles to be used by arbitrators in applying
the voie directe.
21-33
However, the difficulty in this area is summarised as follows in an article by a leading authority in reviewing the application
of these principles in a series of ICC awards: 132
“The summaries set out below confirm that as regards the determination of the law applicable to the merits of the
dispute, there is a wide variance of approach in international arbitration. Certain tribunals adopt the traditional
conflict of laws approach while others opt for the choice of law by the ‘voie directe’. The factors that are considered
to determine the closest relationship are varied: domicile, establishment or seat of the arbitration, etc. It is also
apparent from these awards that the identification of the characteristic performance of the contract is in some
cases difficult, permitting therefore the arbitrator to arrive at an original solution.
These awards also illustrate the importance if not the primacy that the arbitrators of international commerce give to
contractual agreements in comparison with national legislation or those resulting from international conventions.
The determination of the national law applicable may be limited for example to the setting of an interest rate, with
the dispute being decided by according to the contractual agreement.
Finally, the method applied to decide on the applicable law, whether it is an international convention or one or
more national laws (application of various systems being possible, although relatively rarely adopted by parties
or arbitrators), is not always foreign to considerations of convenience, if not equity.” 133
Footnotes
127
For a discussion, see for example, Blessing, “Choice of Substantive Law in International Arbitration” (1997) J. Int. Arb.
Vol.14 No.2, p.39; Wortmann, “Choice of Law by Arbitrators: The Applicable Conflict of Laws System in Arbitration
International” (1998) J. Int. Arb. Vol.14 No.2, p.97.
128
See Mayer, The Laws or Rules of Law Applicable to the Merits of a Dispute and the Freedom of the Arbitrator, Dossiers
of the ICC Institute of World Business Law: Is arbitration only as good as the arbitrator? Status Power and Role of the
Arbitrator (2011) para.10. However, as discussed under art.18, the English courts have recently given weight to the place
of arbitration to determine the law governing the arbitration agreement itself. See C v D [2007] EWCA Civ 1282; and
Sulamerica CIA Nacional de Seguros SA v Enesa Engenharia SA [2012] EWCA Civ 638, discussed under art.18.
129
The provisions were enacted in national laws. However, the terms of the national legislation are intended to be identical
throughout the EU. Under art.3(1) of that Convention, the parties are free to choose the applicable law. For a discussion

Principles used by Tribunals to determine the applicable law, UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
see Carducci, “The Impact of the EU ‘Rome 1’ Regulation on International Litigation and Arbitration, A-National law,
Mandatory and Overriding Rules”, [2011] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.22 No.22, p.31 at part H2E, 1.
130
Report on the Convention on the law applicable to contractual obligations by Mario Giuliano Professor, University of
Milan (who contributed the introduction and the comments on arts 1, 3–8, 10, 12, and 13) and Paul Lagarde, Professor,
University of Paris I (who contributed the comments on arts 2, 9, 11, and 14–33). See [1980] OJ C282/1.
131
The Giuliano-Lagarde Report noted that: “[t]he exclusion of arbitration agreements does not relate solely to the
procedural aspects, but also to the formation, validity and effects of such agreements. Where the arbitration clause forms
an integral part of a contract, the exclusion relates only to the clause itself and not to the contract as a whole. This
exclusion does not prevent such clauses being taken into consideration for the purposes of Article 3(1).”
132
Jolivet, “La détermination du droit applicable au fond du litige” (2008) Cahiers de l’Arbitrage Vol.2, p.15. (The extracts
of ICC awards quoted in the article are in French.) Professor Jolivet is General Counsel of the ICC International Chamber
of Commerce.
133
See also Mayer, The Laws or Rules of Law Applicable to the Merits of a Dispute and the Freedom of the Arbitrator,
Dossiers of the ICC Institute of World Business Law: Is arbitration only as good as the arbitrator? Status Power and
Role of the Arbitrator (2011) paras 28–32, who maintains that the Rome I Regulation is not addressed to arbitrators and
that arbitrators use the place of performance and the debtor’s residence.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
