Section G. - The Future of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638600 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section G. - The Future of International Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Section G. - The Future of International Arbitration
1. 184
It is often said that it is dangerous to make predictions, especially about the future. But there are some predictions that it is safe
to make, because, as William Gibson 141  said, ‘The future is already here’. So here are some predictions that we can confidently
make because we are already seeing part of this future today.
1. 185
International arbitration has amply demonstrated its flexibility and adaptability in the way in which it is used to resolve all
manner of international disputes, from the athlete who is barred from competing in the Olympic games to the multinational
corporation awarded millions of dollars in compensation for the unlawful confiscation of its assets.
1. 186
As international arbitration has become the principal means of resolving international disputes, the leading arbitral institutions
will continue to search for ways of increasing both the scope of arbitration and their own relevance, and they will seek to do
this by exercising more broadly the kind of powers normally reserved to the courts of law, including the power to consolidate
arbitrations and the power to impose sanctions on parties and arbitrators.
1. 187
As arbitration becomes a more prominent feature of business and public life, governments may be moved to intervene to prevent
or regulate certain activities, looking again at what kind of disputes should be ‘arbitrable’, in the sense of being suitable for
resolution by arbitration.
1. 188
Technology is likely to have its own transformative effect. The global pandemic of 2019 and 2020 accelerated the move to
virtual meetings and hearings; artificial intelligence is being used to assist in responding to requests for disclosure of documents
on the Redfern Schedule, as well as to search for documents to support the parties’ cases; and there is even talk of ‘arbitration
by algorithm’. 142
1. 189
The search for greater transparency and for public access to hearings may extend beyond the present ambit of investment
arbitrations, unless (as some commentators have suggested) 143  investment arbitrations are treated as a special category of
disputes, with their own standing tribunals and a high-level appeal tribunal to ensure consistency of decisions and to build up
a corpus of known and well-publicised body of law.
1. 190
There is no doubt that international arbitration is proving to be an adaptable and effective method of dispute resolution. But it
would be wrong to assume that this state of affairs is bound to continue. There are indications that international arbitration has
been used in areas where it might have been wiser to leave matters (for instance, labour relations and consumer disputes) to
specially constituted tribunals, with appeal procedures to correct mistakes and to ensure consistency of decisions.
1. 191
There are also indications of dissatisfaction with the growing judicialisation, cost, delay, and complexity of international
arbitration. If international arbitration strays too far from its roots as a relatively simple, friendly, and effective method of
resolving international disputes, there is a risk that users may return to the national courts or prioritise early mediation and
settlement. It is therefore important that participants in the system such as counsel and arbitrators do not lose sight of the need to

Section G. - The Future of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638600 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
respond to the needs of the end-users (the parties) who want to see a process of efficiency and finality to assist in making future
business decisions. In this context, more frequent use should be made of the many new tools available, including early dismissal
of claims (a type of arbitral ‘strike-out’ proceeding), Emergency Arbitrators for early interim relief, and fast-track arbitration.
By maintaining its flexibility and its ability to respond in an agile manner to evolving disputes, international arbitration will
guarantee its own future.
Footnotes
141
William Gibson is an American–Canadian author who is known as the father of the cyberpunk sub-genre of science
fiction.
142
See the discussion in Scherer, ‘Artificial intelligence and legal decision-making: The wide open?’ (2019) 36(5) J Intl
Arb 539-574.
143
See Redfern, ‘A bridge too far’, in ‘Global Reflections on International Law, Commerce and Dispute Resolution’, ICC
Publication 693, November 2005, at 665.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
