Section B. - Validity of an Arbitration Agreement, UKBC-REDFERN 530638611 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section B. - Validity of an Arbitration Agreement
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 2 - Agreement to Arbitrate
Section B. - Validity of an Arbitration Agreement
(a) Formal validity—need for writing
2. 15
All the international conventions on arbitration discussed above, as well as the Model Law, require that an agreement to arbitrate
shall be ‘in writing’. The historical reason for imposing this requirement is not difficult to divine. A valid agreement to arbitrate
excludes the jurisdiction of the national courts, 20  and means that any dispute between the parties must be resolved by a private
method of dispute resolution—namely, arbitration. This was a serious step to take, albeit one that has become increasingly
commonplace in today’s world of international commerce. Good reasons therefore existed for ensuring that the existence of
such an agreement should be clearly established. This was best done by producing evidence in writing, although, as already
noted in Chapter 1, the trend in modern national legislation has moved towards the relaxation of this formal requirement. 21
2. 16
Article II(2) of the New York Convention defines ‘writing’ as follows: ‘The term “agreement in writing” shall include an arbitral
clause in a contract or an arbitration agreement, signed by the parties or contained in an exchange of letters or telegrams.’
2. 17
The requirement for signature by the parties has given rise to problems in some states, 22  but the general view today is that a
signature is not necessary, provided that the arbitration agreement is in writing. 23
2. 18
There has, however, been a revolution in communications since the New York Convention was drawn up in 1958. Telegrams
are today an archaic curiosity. They have been replaced by various forms of written electronic communication. These changes
have been reflected in the Model Law, which goes much further than the New York Convention in its definition of ‘writing’
and has itself been the subject of important recommended interpretations and revisions. 24
2. 19
The 2006 version of the Model Law contains both a long and a short form option for establishing the writing requirement.
Option 1 provides as follows: 25
[ … ]
 
(3)An agreement is in writing if its content is recorded in any form, whether or not the arbitration agreement or contract
has been concluded orally, by conduct, or by other means.
 
(4)The requirement that an arbitration agreement be in writing is met by an electronic communication if the information
contained therein is accessible so as to be useable for subsequent reference; electronic communication means any
communication that the parties make by means of data messages; data message means information generated, sent, received
or stored by electronic, magnetic, optical or similar means, including, but not limited to, electronic data interchange (EDI),
electronic mail, telegram, telex or telecopy.

Section B. - Validity of an Arbitration Agreement, UKBC-REDFERN 530638611 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(5)Furthermore, an arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in an exchange of statements of claim and defence
in which the existence of an agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other.
 
(6)The reference in a contract to any document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an arbitration agreement in
writing, provided that the reference is such as to make that clause part of the contract.
2. 20
Option 1 has brought the Model Law into line with modern commercial life, as reflected by national legislation and repeated
court decisions in recent decades. For instance, as long ago as the 1980s an exchange of telexes between two firms of brokers
in Paris containing the simple statement ‘English law—arbitration, if any, London according ICC Rules’ was held to be a valid
arbitration agreement, providing for arbitration in London under the ICC Rules, with English law as the substantive law of
the contract. 26
2. 21
However, whilst the formal requirements may have been relaxed, there remains a minimum requirement for a permanent
record (‘useable for subsequent reference’ in the terms of the Model Law) from which a written transcription can be made.
For example, the Netherlands Arbitration Act 1986 requires that the arbitration agreement shall be proven by an instrument
in writing expressly or impliedly accepted by the parties. 27  For its part, as mentioned in Chapter 1, Swiss law requires an
agreement to be made in writing or by means of communication that allows it to be evidenced by a text. Section 178(1) of the
Swiss Private International Law Act (as amended in January 2021) states simply: ‘The arbitration agreement must be made in
writing or any other means of communication allowing it to be evidenced by text.’ 28
2. 22
Thus, for the purposes of the Model Law Option 1, the requirement for writing may now be satisfied where there is a record
‘in any form’ of the content of the arbitration agreement.
2. 23
Moreover, where a party takes part in an arbitration without denying the existence of an arbitration agreement, 29  it will, in
the normal course, be deemed to have granted implied consent. In some systems of law, an oral agreement to arbitrate will be
regarded as being ‘in writing’ if it is made ‘by reference to terms which are in writing’, or if an oral agreement ‘is recorded
by one of the parties, or by a third party, with the authority of the parties to the agreement’. 30  In these modern arbitration
laws, there has, in effect, been a triumph of substance over form: as long as there is some written evidence of an agreement to
arbitrate, the form in which that agreement is recorded is immaterial. 31
2. 24
Option 2 of the 2006 Model Law goes a step further. It does not refer to a writing requirement at all, but rather provides that it
is sufficient to show ‘agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes’. 32  This reflects the latest position
under some systems of law that arbitration agreements are not subject to any requirements of form. For instance, Article 1507
of the French Code of Civil Procedure (as modified by Article 2 of Decree 2011-48) provides that ‘an arbitration agreement
shall not be subject to any requirements as to its form’. 33
2. 25
However, a degree of caution is necessary. First, even courts in jurisdictions familiar with international arbitration still may
refuse to enforce arbitration agreements that are not in a written document signed by the parties or otherwise contained in an
exchange of communications between the parties. 34  Secondly, an arbitration agreement that is regarded as valid by an arbitral
tribunal or court in one country may not be so regarded by the courts of the country in which the award falls to be enforced. 35
By way of example, the Norwegian Court of Appeal refused recognition of an award rendered in London because an exchange
of emails did not, in its view, satisfy the writing requirement of Article II(2) of the New York Convention. Although such an
electronic exchange was valid and sufficient to evidence the existence of an arbitration agreement as a matter of the law of the
place of arbitration—that is, English law—the Court held that the validity of the arbitration agreement was to be separately
assessed by the local enforcement authority and that ‘it should not be sufficient for enforcement that the arbitral award is valid
according to the law of the country in question’ (in this case, England, the place of arbitration). 36  While the authors might

Section B. - Validity of an Arbitration Agreement, UKBC-REDFERN 530638611 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
expect the Norwegian courts today to reach a different decision on the same question, this judgment shows the risks that are run
in some jurisdictions (in the place of enforcement if not in the place of arbitration) if requirements as to form are not satisfied.
2. 26
Finally, there are still states in which special requirements of form are imposed in respect of agreements to arbitrate. 37
Accordingly, the relevant national law must be examined if there is reason to believe that the formal validity of an arbitration
agreement is likely to be questioned under that law.
(b) A defined legal relationship
2. 27
Almost all international arbitrations arise out of contractual relationships between the parties. However, for the purposes of both
the New York Convention and the Model Law, it is sufficient that there should be a ‘defined legal relationship’ between the
parties, whether contractual or not. Plainly, there has to be some contractual relationship (real or implied) between the parties,
since there must be an agreement to arbitrate to form the basis of the arbitral proceedings. 38  Given the existence of such an
agreement, the dispute submitted to arbitration may be governed by principles of delictual or tortious liability rather than (as
is usually the case) by the law of contract.
2. 28
In Kaverit Steel Crane Ltd v Kone Corporation, 39  Kaverit commenced court proceedings alleging that Kone had breached
certain licence and distribution agreements. Kone sought a stay and a reference to arbitration pursuant to the arbitration clause
in the agreements. The clause stated that all disputes ‘arising out of or in connection with this contract’ would be referred to
arbitration. The ABQB refused the stay on the grounds that some of the claims by Kaverit contained allegations that went
beyond breach of contract, for example conspiracy and inducing breach of contract. The court held that these tort-based claims
fell outside the scope of the arbitration clause.
2. 29
However, the Alberta Court of Appeal held that the wording of the arbitration clause was wide enough to bring within its scope
any claim that relied on the existence of a contractual relationship, even if the claim itself was a claim in tort. 40  To give an
example: because the claim alleging ‘conspiracy by unlawful means to harm [Kaverit]’ relied upon a breach of contract as the
source of the ‘unlawfulness’, that dispute should be referred to arbitration. However, it was held that those claims that were not
based on the existence of a contract should proceed to trial, not arbitration.
2. 30
More recently, courts around the world have adopted wider interpretations of similar clauses. For example, the Chinese courts
have held that ‘all disputes arising out of or in connection with the contract’ will capture tortious claims. 41  In Hong Kong, a
similar test has been applied, pursuant to which a tortious claim will fall within the scope of an arbitration clause if ‘(1) the
resolution of a contractual issue is necessary for a decision on the tortious claim; or (2) the contractual and tortious disputes are
so closely knitted together on the facts that an agreement to arbitrate on one can properly be construed as covering the other’. 42
The decision of the English House of Lords (now the UK Supreme Court) in Fiona Trust is a notable example of this practical
modern trend. Lord Hoffmann considered the prior case law concerning the construction of arbitration clauses and the precise
meaning of wording such as ‘arising out of’ and opined that ‘the distinctions which they make reflect no credit upon English
commercial law’. He continued that:
“[T]he construction of an arbitration clause should start from the assumption that the parties, as rational
businessmen, are likely to have intended any dispute arising out of the relationship into which they have entered
or purported to enter to be decided by the same tribunal. The clause should be construed in accordance with
this presumption unless the language makes it clear that certain questions were intended to be excluded from the
arbitrator’s jurisdiction.” 43

Section B. - Validity of an Arbitration Agreement, UKBC-REDFERN 530638611 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
(c) A subject matter capable of settlement by arbitration
2. 31
In determining whether a dispute is capable of settlement by arbitration, the question is whether a dispute is ‘arbitrable’. As
explained in Chapter 1, arbitrability, in the sense in which it is used in this book, involves determining which types of dispute
may be resolved by arbitration and which belong exclusively to the domain of the courts. The application of the New York
Convention and the Model Law is limited to disputes that are ‘capable of settlement by arbitration’. 44
2. 32
This requirement is dealt with in more detail later in this chapter. 45  Suffice to say that, in principle, any dispute should be just
as capable of being resolved by a private arbitral tribunal as by the judge of a national court. However, it is precisely because
arbitration is a private proceeding with public consequences 46  that some types of dispute are reserved for national courts, the
proceedings of which are generally in the public domain. It is in this sense that they are not ‘capable of settlement by arbitration’.
National laws establish the domain of arbitration as opposed to that of the local courts. Each state decides which matters may
or may not be resolved by arbitration in accordance with its own political, social, and economic policy.
Footnotes
20
See the discussion in Chapter 1, paragraphs 1.20ff.
21
In this regard, see Landau, ‘The requirement of a written form for an arbitration agreement: When “written” means
“oral”’, Sixteenth ICCA Congress, London, 12–15 May 2002.
22
See, e.g., the cases cited in Cohen, ‘Agreements in writing: Notes in the margin of the Sixth Goff Lecture’ (1997) 13
Arb Intl 273. This article was a response to the earlier Kaplan, ‘Is the need for writing as expressed in the New York
Convention and Model Law out of step with commercial practice?’ (1996) 12 Arb Intl 27. More recently, see also
Kanematsu USA Inc. v ATS—Advanced Telecommunications Systems do Brasil Ltda, SEC 885, 18 April 2012, in which
the Brazilian Supreme Court of Justice held that a signature is required where a party seeks to incorporate into a contract
an arbitration clause contained in a set of standard terms and conditions.
23
By way of modern example, see Jiangsu Overseas Group Co Ltd v Concord Energy Pte Ltd [2016] 4 SLR 1336 (in
which the Singapore High Court held that an arbitration agreement recorded only in draft, unsigned contracts was valid
in the light of the parties’ conduct and correspondence). See also Sphere Drake Ins. PLC v Marine Towing, Inc., 16 F.3d
666, 669–670 (5th Cir. 1994) (in which the US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit held that an arbitration clause was
valid even though the underlying contract was not signed).
24
On 7 July 2006, UNCITRAL issued a recommendation that Art. II (2) of the New York Convention be applied
‘recognizing that the circumstances described therein are not exhaustive’. Subsequently, on 4 December 2006, the Model
Law was amended pursuant to General Assembly Resolution 61/33 to include notable changes to Art. 7 on the writing
requirement.
25
The options are contained in Art. 7 of the Model Law. By way of example, Option 1 was adopted by Singapore in its
2012 revision to the Singapore International Arbitration Act, s. 2A.
26
Arab African Energy Corporation Ltd v Olieprodukten Nederland BV [1983] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 419. More recently, see AQZ
v ARA [2015] SGHC 49, in which the Singapore High Court held that an arbitration agreement was valid notwithstanding
that it was recorded by one party only and was not signed by the other party at all. See also Jiangsu Overseas Group Co
Ltd v Concord Energy Pte Ltd [2016] 4 SLR 1336, in which the Singapore High Court held that an arbitration agreement
that was recorded only in draft, unsigned contracts was valid in the light of the parties’ conduct and correspondence.
27
Netherlands Arbitration Act 1986, s. 1021; see the commentary on this article in Sanders and van den Berg, The
Netherlands Arbitration Act 1986: Text and Notes, English (Kluwer, 1987), p. 12, where it is said that the Act abolishes
the possibility, which existed under the old Act, that an arbitration agreement could be concluded orally, but that an
arbitration agreement is deemed to be concluded if the parties appear before the arbitral tribunal without invoking the
lack of an agreement prior to raising any defence.

Section B. - Validity of an Arbitration Agreement, UKBC-REDFERN 530638611 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
28
Similar wording is contained in the Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996, s. 7. See Great Offshore Ltd v Iranian
Offshore Engineering and Construction Co. (2008) 14 SCC 240 for an analysis of the Indian law position.
29
See Sanders, ‘Arbitration’, in Cappelletti (ed.) Encyclopedia of International and Comparative Law, Vol. XVI (Brill,
1987), ch. 12, para. 106.
30
See, e.g., the English Arbitration Act 1996, ss. 5(43)ff. The ‘implied consent’ provisions of the Model Law are also to be
found in s. 5(5). In Heifer International Inc. v Christiansen [2007] EWHC 3015 (TCC), the court held that an arbitration
agreement was validly concluded by reference to a written arbitration clause contained in another contract.
31
See, e.g., Liebscher, ‘Interpretation of the written form requirement Art. 7(2) UNCITRAL Model Law’ (2005) 8 Intl Arb
L Rev 164 and the cases cited therein.
32
In their respective arbitration laws, Belgium and Scotland have adopted the Option 2 wording. See the Code Judiciaire,
Art. 1681 and the Arbitration (Scotland) Act 2010, s. 4, respectively.
33
See also the New Zealand Arbitration Act 1996, s. 7(1), which provides that ‘an arbitration agreement may be made
orally or in writing’.
34
See, e.g., the decision of the US Second Circuit Court of Appeals in Kahn Lucas Lancaster Inc. v Lark International
Ltd, 186 F.3d 210 (2d Cir. 1999). This decision has been applied by a number of other US courts, which have arrived
at varying interpretations (some liberal; others less so) of an ‘exchange of letters and telegrams’. See, e.g., the US
District Court of the Southern District of California decision in Chloe Z Fishing Co. Inc. v Odyssey Re (London) Ltd,
109 F.Supp.2d 1048 (SD Cal. 2000); the US District Court of the Western District of Washington decision in Bothell
v Hitachi Zosen Corporation, 97 F.Supp.2d 1048 (WD Wash. 2000); the Third Circuit Court of Appeals decision in
Standard Bent Glass Corporation v Glassrobots Oy, 333 F.3d 440, 449 (3d Cir. 2003). Most recently, the District Court
of the Southern District of New York has affirmed the Kahn Lucas approach, but found that email exchanges between
the parties ‘comfortably satisf[ied] the standard set by the [New York] Convention’: Glencore Ltd v Degussa Engineered
Carbons LP, 848 F.Supp.2d 410 (SDNY 2012). See also TransAsia Lawyers v EcoNova, Inc, Not Reported in F.Supp.3d
(2014).
35
See the discussion in Chapter 3 on the law governing the arbitration agreement.
36
Decision of the Halogaland Court of Appeal (Norway), 16 August 1999, (2002) XXVII YBCA 519.
37
Including, particularly, the requirement in some jurisdictions (e.g. Brazil) that an arbitration clause is not operative unless
it provides for the procedure to be adopted in the arbitration: see fn. 5.
38
For an example see D v U (ASBL) UR, Court of Appeal, Brussels, Case No. 2016/AR/2048, 29 August 2018. In that case
the court found that the requisite defined legal relationship did not exist. The arbitration agreement in question was found
in the statutes of FIFA and UEFA, to which the plaintiff had adhered through its own statutes. The arbitration clause
provided broadly that all disputes between FIFA or UEFA and football clubs would be submitted to CAS arbitration,
without further specification. The Belgian Court of Appeal found that this ‘general clause did not contain any reference
to a defined legal relationship’, and that ‘[t]he intention of the drafters of the clause is visibly to cover any type of
dispute between the parties indicated; this makes the clause a general clause, which cannot be applied because it is not
an arbitration clause recognized in Belgian law’: see Stephan W. Schill (ed.) Yearbook Commercial Arbitration 2019—
Volume XLIV (ICCA & Kluwer Law International, 2019), pp. 1–9, paras 12, 14.
39
Kaverit Steel Crane Ltd v Kone Corporation (1992) 87 DLR (4th) 129, (1994) XVII YBCA 346.
40
The Court held that a dispute ‘arises out of or in connection with a contract’ if the ‘existence of the contract is germane
either to the claim or the defence’: ibid., at 295–297.
41
See the view of the Supreme People’s Court (SPC) in SPC, The Second National Foreign-related Commercial and
Maritime Trial Work Meeting Minutes (26 December 2005), Art. 7. See also Empresa Exportadora de Azucar v Industria
Azucarera Nacional SA [1983] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 171.
42
See Gossip Daily Ltd v Next Media Magazines Ltd and Others [2018] HKCFI 1951. However, by way of contrast in
Castlemil Infant (HK) Supplies Co Ltd v Care N Love Development Ltd [2018] HKDC 1419, the Hong Kong District
Court found that a claim in tort did not fall within the scope of the parties’ agreement to arbitrate ‘any dispute, controversy
or claim arising out of or relating to [their contract]’. Finally, see also the decision of the FCA in Walter Rau Neusser Oel
Und Fett Ag v Cross Pacific Trading Ltd [2005] FCA 1102, holding that claims in relation to fraud and misrepresentations
that took place before the contract was concluded and which allegedly induced the parties to enter into the contract, did
not ‘arise out of’ the contract and therefore fell outside the arbitration clause in question. The Walter case is discussed
in Morrison, ‘Defining the scope of arbitrable disputes in Australia: Towards a “liberal” approach?’ (2005) 22 J Intl
Arb 569. These issues are discussed in greater detail in van den Berg, ‘Scope of the arbitration agreement’ (1996) XXI
YBCA 415.
43
Fiona Trust and Holding Corporation v Privalov [2007] UKHL 40, at [13].
44
New York Convention, Arts II(1) and V(2)(a); Model Law, Arts 34(2)(b)(i) and 36(1)(b)(i).
45
See paragraphs 2.125–2.178.

Section B. - Validity of an Arbitration Agreement, UKBC-REDFERN 530638611 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
46
For example, in the recognition and enforcement of the award.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
