Article 24(2): Establishing the procedural timetable, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406904 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 24(2): Establishing the procedural timetable
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Case Management Issues
Article 24(2): Establishing the procedural timetable
“During such conference, or as soon as possible thereafter, the arbitral tribunal shall establish the procedural timetable
that it intends to follow for the efficient conduct of the arbitration. The procedural timetable and any modifications thereto
shall be communicated to the Court and the parties.”
24-24
To establish the procedural timetable (which is also sometimes referred to as the provisional timetable), the Tribunal needs
to have a clear idea as to the procedure to be followed and the time limits that are to be followed. Therefore, the procedural
timetable is integrally linked to the procedure discussed under arts 22 and 25.
24-25
Ideally, the timetable will cover the entire proceedings, up to the final hearing, and the ensuing award. The scope of the timetable
will very much depend on the structure of the proceedings. If they are bifurcated (with a liability phase and a damages phase, for
example), the timetable will typically only cover the first phase of the proceedings. 333  An example of a procedural timetable
is to be found in Pt II, Document 9.1. In accordance with art.27, when it closes the proceedings, the Tribunal is required to
provide the ICC Court and the parties with the date by which it expects to submit its draft award. Since the procedural timetable
relates not only to submissions of the parties and hearings but also to deliberations and rendering the award, it is submitted
that it is preferable to indicate at the outset the time period that the Tribunal will require after the last submission to prepare
the draft award.
24-26
In order to assist the ICC Court in monitoring the arbitration, in particular pursuant to art.31(2), when extensions of time for
rendering the award are to be granted, the Tribunal is required to communicate any subsequent modifications of the procedural
timetable to the court. Naturally, the parties are to be informed of those modifications as well. The parties will often be the cause
of the modifications, for example when they request an extension of time for making a certain submission. In any event, the
Tribunal will generally consult the parties before the procedural timetable is modified.
Footnotes
333
As to the criteria of bifurcation, see the discussion at para.25-18.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
