A sole arbitrator as a rule, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407003 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
A sole arbitrator as a rule
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
A sole arbitrator as a rule
30-39
Pursuant to art.2(1) of App.VI, the ICC Court may appoint a sole arbitrator notwithstanding any contrary provision of the
arbitration agreement. 664  Thus, where the Expedited Procedure Provisions apply, a sole arbitrator will be appointed by the ICC
Court even if the arbitration agreement consists of the standard arbitration clause and when it provides expressly for a three-
member tribunal. In the 2021 ICC Note it is expressly stated in bold print at para.144:
“By submitting to arbitration under the Rules, the parties agree that any reference of disputes to three arbitrators
in their arbitration agreement is subject to the Court’s discretion to appoint a sole arbitrator if the Expedited
Procedure Provisions apply.”
30-40
Article 2(2) of App.VI allows the parties to nominate a sole arbitrator within a time limit to be fixed by the Secretariat. In a
standard ICC arbitration, where the parties’ arbitration agreement provides for the appointment of a sole arbitrator, the parties
normally have “30 days from the date when the claimant’s Request for Arbitration has been received by the other party” to
nominate the sole arbitrator. 665  One would therefore presume that the Secretariat would tend to fix a shorter time-limit in cases
where the Expedited Procedure Provisions would seem to apply and where a sole arbitrator is to be appointed. However, as
long as the Secretariat has not seen the respondent’s Answer, this remains an unknown factor. 666  The 2021 ICC Note provides
for the time being for no indicative time-limit that the Secretariat will set to the parties for nominating the sole arbitrator, but
presumably it will generally be less than 30 days.
Footnotes
664
The appointment of a sole arbitrator where the amount in dispute is lower than US$2 million is consistent with the
general principle set by art.12(2) of the ICC Rules (appointment of a sole arbitrator unless the circumstances require
otherwise) and the ICC Court’s practice to appoint sole arbitrators where the arbitration agreement was silent as to the
number of arbitrators and where the amount in dispute was below US$2–3 million.
665
Article 12(3), this time-limit may be extended by the Secretariat, and in practice regularly is extended.
666
Indeed, pursuant to art.1(3) of App.VI, it is only upon receipt of the Answer that the Secretariat will inform the parties
that the Expedited Procedure Provisions shall apply in the case.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
