Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638671 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section A. - Introduction
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 10 - Challenge of Arbitral Awards
Section A. - Introduction
10. 01
No one likes losing. So it is not surprising that, when a client is disappointed with an arbitral award, the first question the lawyer
is asked is: ‘How can I appeal?’ As is so often the case when a lawyer is asked a question, the answer is: ‘It depends.’
10. 02
First, it depends on whether the relevant rules of arbitration establish any internal appeal procedure, as is the case in certain
maritime and commodity arbitration systems, 1  and in certain investment arbitration systems such as in the EU-Canada
Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (known as ‘CETA’). 2  However, a right of appeal is the exception and most
arbitration rules provide unequivocally that an arbitral award is final and binding. 3  These are not intended to be empty words.
One of the advantages of arbitration is that it is intended to result in the final determination of the dispute between the parties.
If the parties want a compromise solution to be proposed, they should opt for mediation. If they are prepared to fight the case
to the highest court in the land, they should opt for litigation. By choosing arbitration, the parties choose, in principle, finality.
An arbitral award is not intended to be a mere proposal as to how the dispute might be resolved, nor is it intended to be the
first step on a ladder of appeals.
10. 03
To the losing party, this ‘advantage’ of arbitration may seem, in retrospect, to be the very opposite. However, the laws of many
countries, reflecting the policy of the New York Convention and of the Model Law, have traditionally manifested what has been
described by the US federal courts as ‘a pro-enforcement bias’. 4  This means that whilst it may be possible to challenge an
arbitral award, the available options are likely to be limited—and intentionally so.
10. 04
It is usually the law of the seat of the arbitration 5  that contains these limited provisions for challenging an arbitral award. 6  Such
laws are principally focused on ensuring that the arbitration has been conducted in accordance with basic rules of due process,
respecting the parties’ equal right to be heard before an independent and impartial arbitral tribunal within the boundaries of
their arbitration agreement. Grounds of challenge are rarely concerned with a review of the merits of the tribunal’s decision on
the law or facts, thus distinguishing challenge from an appeal.
10. 05
It is important at the outset to make a clear distinction between actions to challenge an award 7  and opposition to actions seeking
to recognise and enforce an award. A challenge to an award (usually) takes place in the courts of the seat of the arbitration. It is
an attempt by the losing party to invalidate the award on the basis of the statutory grounds available under the law of the seat.
In contrast, actions seeking to recognise and enforce an award, which are fully discussed in the next chapter, may take place
in any jurisdiction signatory to the New York Convention, or one that has adopted the relevant provisions of the Model Law.
In such actions, the party against whom recognition and enforcement is sought may rely on the limited exceptions contained in
Article V of the New York Convention or the corresponding provisions of the Model Law to seek to block enforcement.
(a) Purpose of challenge
10. 06

Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638671 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
The purpose of challenging an award before a national court at the seat of arbitration is to have that court declare all, or part,
of the award null and void. If an award is set aside or annulled by the relevant court, it will usually be treated as invalid, and
accordingly unenforceable, not only by the courts of the seat of arbitration, but also by national courts elsewhere. 8  This is
because, under both the New York Convention and the Model Law, a competent court may refuse to grant recognition and
enforcement of an award that has been set aside by a court of the seat of arbitration. 9  It is important to note that, following
complete annulment, the claimant can recommence proceedings because the award simply does not exist—that is, the status
quo ante is restored. The reviewing court cannot alter the terms of an award nor can it decide the dispute based on its own view
of the merits. Unless the reviewing court has a power to remit the fault to the original tribunal, 10  any new submission of the
dispute to arbitration after annulment has to be undertaken by commencement of a new arbitration with a new arbitral tribunal.
(b) Preconditions to challenge
10. 07
Before challenging an award before the relevant court, it will usually be necessary to ‘exhaust’ any other remedies: these may
include any available process of appeal or review under the applicable rules or law, and any available provision for the correction
of the award or for an additional award. 11
10. 08
With regard to appeal or review, certain rules of arbitration and certain arbitration agreements provide for appeals to ‘second-
tier’ tribunals. 12  Subject to the applicable rules, it is usually the award of that second tribunal, and not any earlier award, that is
final and binding upon the parties and which may be subject to challenge before the competent courts. With regard to correction
of the award or supplemental decision, it is usual for rules of arbitration, as well as national legislation, to provide a mechanism
for the correction of awards by the arbitral tribunal itself and it is the corrected or supplemented award which will be subject
to judicial review. 13
(c) Time limits for challenge
10. 09
Time limits for applying to correct or amend an arbitral award, or to challenge an award by an application to the relevant national
court, are likely to be short and strictly enforced. 14  The position in each case will depend upon the relevant rules or legislation,
but by way of example:
 
•under the UNCITRAL Rules, requests for interpretation or correction of an award, or for an additional award, must be
made within thirty days after receipt of the award; 15
 
•under the Model Law, an application for setting aside an award must be made within three months of receiving the award
or, if a request for an interpretation, correction, or additional award has been made, within three months of that request
being disposed of by the arbitral tribunal. 16
Footnotes
1
See paragraph 10.11.
2
CETA provides for a CETA Appellate Tribunal, with the power to review first instance arbitral decisions on wide
grounds, including ‘errors in the application or interpretation of applicable law’ (Art. 8.28(2)(a)) and ‘manifest errors
in the appreciation of the facts’ (Art. 8.28(2)(b)).

Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638671 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
3
See, e.g., LCIA Rules, Art. 26.8; ICC Rules, Art. 35.6; ICDR Rules, Art. 30.1.
4
Parsons Whittemore Overseas Co. Inc. v Société Générale de l’Industrie du Papier, 508 F.2d 969, 973 (2d Cir. 1974).
5
Or, if the parties have chosen a different procedural law to govern the arbitration, under that law: New York Convention,
Art. V.1(e); Model Law, Art. 36(1)(a)(v).
6
Including a partial, or interim, award that is final as to the issue(s) it addresses.
7
Also referred to as ‘actions to set aside an award’, ‘actions seeking annulment of the award’ or (in the United States)
‘actions seeking to vacate the award’.
8
New York Convention, Art. V, provides only that a competent national authority may refuse to enforce an award that
has been annulled at the seat. It is not obliged to do so; accordingly, an award that has been set aside by the court of the
seat of arbitration may be granted recognition and enforcement if the enforcing court so concludes. France is one of the
more liberal jurisdictions in this regard, famously granting recognition to a Swiss-seated award that had been set aside
by Swiss courts: Hilmarton I, Cass. Civ., 1ère Civ., 23 Mar. 1994, [1994] Rev Arb 437. See also PT Putrabali Adyamulia
v Rena Holdings, Cass. Civ., Ch. Civ. 1ere, 29 June 2007, in which a French court enforced an award that had been set
aside at the seat in England. Similarly, the District Court for the District of Columbia in Chromalloy Aeroservices v Arab
Republic of Egypt, 939 F.Supp. 907, 909 (DDC 1996) enforced an award that had been annulled at its seat in Egypt. In
Corporacion Mexicana de Mantenimiento Integral, S. de RL de CV v PEMEX-Exploracion y Produccion, Docket No.
13-4022 (2d Cir. 2016), the US courts enforced an ICC award set aside in Mexico where denying enforcement would
be fundamentally unfair and violate basic notions of justice. However, much will depend on the particular award and
the enforcing court will still give great weight to the courts of the seat: see, e.g., TermoRio SA ESP v Electranta SP,
487 F.3d 928 (DCC 2007) (refusing to enforce an award annulled by the courts of the seat in Colombia) and Getma
International v Republic of Guinea, 862 F.3d 45 (DDC 2017) (refusing to enforce an award annulled in Guinea). For
further discussion of this concept, see Chapter 11.
9
New York Convention, Art. V.1(e); Model Law, Art. 36(1)(a)(v).
10
See paragraphs 10.18–10.20
11
See, e.g., the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 70(2), which states that an application or appeal may not be brought if the
applicant or appellant has not first exhausted (a) any available arbitral process of appeal or review, and (b) any available
recourse under s. 57 (correction of award or additional award).
12
See paragraph 10.11.
13
See paragraphs 10.14 and 10.16–10.17.
14
See, e.g., Terna Bahrain v Bin Kamil [2012] EWHC 3283, in which the applicant tried to challenge an award under the
English Arbitration Act 1996 for procedural irregularity, but the English court refused to hear the challenge because
the application was made after the twenty-eight-day period for doing so had expired. The same strict approach is taken
in the United States—see Glaser v Legg, Case No. 12-cv-00805, 2013 WL 870382 (DDC, 11 March 2013), in which a
petition to vacate award was untimely, because it was filed more than three months after the award was issued. In Brazil,
the Court of Appeals of São Paulo in Companhia do Metropolitano de São Paulo—Metrô v Consórcio Via Amarela,
Appeal No. 0177130-22.2010.8.26.0100, 3 December 2012, held that the Brazilian statutory period of ninety days for
challenging an award does not run while a valid request for the correction and interpretation of award is pending, but
found the request for annulment to be nonetheless untimely because the party had not first filed a valid request for
clarification of the award under the ICC Rules.
15
UNCITRAL Rules, Arts 37–39.
16
Model Law, Art. 34(3).
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
