Article 23(1)(d), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407036 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 23(1)(d)
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 23(1)(d)
“unless the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate, a list of issues to be determined;”
23-38
The issues are the questions of fact and law that the Tribunal has to decide upon the requests for relief of each party.
23-39
The summary of the parties’ respective claims in the Terms of Reference sets out the factual and legal basis for the relief sought.
Some of the factual and legal claims may not be in dispute. But others will provide the core of the dispute.
23-40
The issues to be determined vary with each arbitration. Frequently, there are issues of jurisdiction either generally or with respect
to a particular party. Usually, there is a dispute as to whether a party has breached contractual or extra-contractual rights. Almost
invariably, there is a request for interest on amounts awarded and for costs including legal costs.
23-41
In a typical arbitration regarding, for example, unlawful termination of a distribution agreement, the issues in dispute may well
be issues such as: (1) the law applicable to the distribution agreement; (2) whether the distributor breached a provision of the
agreement (such as an agreement not to compete or such as the agreement to pay in full and in a timely manner the invoices
or to make minimum purchases); (3) whether such breach provided grounds for termination; (4) whether notice of termination
was validly given; and (5) if the agreement was not validly terminated, the measure of damages for improper termination. In
some rare instances, the issues will include issues of tort (such as fraud in the inducement of the contract) as well as the law
applicable to the tort.
23-42
The Tribunal, in consultation with the parties, usually drafts the list of issues. The Tribunal will seek to include as an issue to be
decided, any issue on which a party insists, provided that it is within the scope of the arbitration agreement and the claims of the
parties. The Tribunal will follow the claims of the parties, but may well raise issues of its own that are to be decided. For example,
many Tribunals raise on their own initiative issues such as the application of the Vienna Convention to the transaction or part of
it; the application of antitrust law; or issues as to the proper authorisation of the arbitration agreement or the underlying contract.
23-43
The drafting of the Terms of Reference takes place at an early stage in the proceedings where the complexities of the case have
often not sufficiently crystallised or the Tribunal may feel that based on the parties’ submissions it is not yet sufficiently familiar
with the case to set out an exhaustive list of all issues in the Terms of Reference. A lack of familiarity with the case will often be
felt to exist when the parties have not provided a detailed description of their claims and defences in the Request and Answer to
the Request respectively. Moreover, there is frequently a concern that the issues may evolve during the course of the arbitration.
As a result, some Tribunals prefer to use the option left open by art.23(1)(d) not to set out a list of issues to be decided.
23-44

Article 23(1)(d), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407036 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
When a party raises jurisdictional or procedural issues, it is good practice to list them in the Terms of Reference, since they will
normally be addressed at the beginning of the arbitral proceedings.
23-45
A common approach is for the Tribunal to set out a list of issues but to include a statement that the list of issues will be subject
to review and modification in accordance with the parties’ submissions. Other Tribunals adopt language such as the following:
“The issues to be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal shall be those resulting from the parties’ submissions,
including forthcoming submissions, and which in the Tribunal’s view are relevant to adjudication of the parties’
respective claims and defences, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 23(4) of the ICC Rules. Therefore,
pursuant to Article 23(1)(d) of the Rules, the Tribunal considers it inappropriate to include at this stage a specific
list of the issues to be determined.”
23-46
This formulation is intended to leave the list of issues open while at the same time recognising that the Tribunal has considered
the matter and decided, in accordance with art.23(1)(d), that it is inappropriate to draw up a list of issues for the Terms of
Reference.
23-47
Yet another, and sometimes very helpful approach is to have both parties draft a list of issues to be decided, and to include
them in the summary of each party’s position in the Terms of Reference. This is not only a valuable exercise for each party,
but can assist them in identifying and focusing on the truly dispositive issues in their subsequent written submissions. It will
also help the Tribunal quickly gain a better understanding of what the case is about, or of what the parties believe it is about.
It may also facilitate the Tribunal’s discussion with the parties to better understand the parties’ position as regards the relevant
issues. The major problem with this approach, however, is that the parties may not be in a position to draw up a detailed list
of issues when commenting on the Terms of Reference.
23-48
In deciding which approach to adopt, and which to argue for, the parties and the Tribunal have to be mindful of various
consequences. For the parties, if there is no list of issues, there may well be less clarity as to what issues they are supposed to
address. This lack of clarity can be compounded if the other party raises new or vague issues in subsequent submissions.
23-49
For the Tribunal, listing the issues to be decided does not only require a first serious study of the parties’ submissions, but also
an analysis of what decisions the Tribunal may have to take in order to decide on the parties’ claims. The intellectual exercise
which is necessary in identifying the key issues will often be helpful for both the Tribunal and the parties, and its value in getting
a better understanding of what are truly the key issues of the case should not be underestimated even at an early stage.
23-50
Parties have also been heard to complain that Tribunals did not address the issues in the award that the parties thought should
be addressed. The best way of ensuring that an issue is addressed in the award is to have it listed as an issue in the Terms of
Reference. That will not only draw the Tribunal’s attention to the issue, but it will also ensure that the issue is scrutinised by
the ICC Court under art.34 and, if necessary, reviewed by national courts.
23-51
This desire for certainty has to be balanced against the need to adapt the case to the submissions of the parties. Some issues will
perhaps disappear during the course of the arbitration. Other issues may appear to gain importance as the further submissions
are made. In addition, an unsuccessful party may seek to challenge the award based on the failure to decide an issue. One
approach to seek to reconcile these two concerns is to insert in the Terms of Reference a list of the issues to be determined while
recognising that the list may evolve and then confirming with the parties shortly prior to the oral hearings that the Tribunal has
in fact established an up-to-date list of the issues to be decided.
23-52

Article 23(1)(d), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407036 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Article 24(3) expressly contemplates the possibility of having a further case management conference, once the initial conference
has taken place. An additional case management conference, for instance prior to the evidentiary hearing, may be a good
opportunity for both the Tribunal and the parties to revisit and discuss the list of issues to be determined pursuant to the Terms
of Reference.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
