Requests to Produce from the Tribunal, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407091 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Requests to Produce from the Tribunal
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Requests to Produce from the Tribunal
25-72
Article 3(10) of the IBA Rules on Evidence permits the Tribunal to request production of documents in the following terms:
 
“10.At any time before the arbitration is concluded, the Arbitral Tribunal may (i) request any Party to produce
Documents, (ii) request any Party to use its best efforts to take or (iii) itself take, any step that it considers
appropriate to obtain Documents from any person or organisation. Any Party may object to the request
for any of the reasons set forth in Articles 9.2 or 9.3. In such cases, Article 3.4 to Article 3.8 shall apply
correspondingly.”
25-73
It would appear that art.25(4) provides a Tribunal with at least a similarly broad power, whether or not there exists any reference
to the IBA Rules on Evidence.
25-74
Tribunals are generally reluctant to take the initiative in ordering production of documents. However, this reluctance is
sometimes overcome if there are repeated references by one or both parties to existing documents that are relevant to deciding
the dispute. A Tribunal is judging a case. It is important, both for the Tribunal and for any national courts that review the award,
that the Tribunal take any necessary steps to ensure that the proceedings are just in a broad sense of that term.
25-75
Pursuant to art.9(5) of the IBA Rules on Evidence, the sanction for a failure to produce a document pursuant to an order of the
Tribunal is an adverse inference. 400  In addition, parties may have alternatives to force production through local courts.
Footnotes
400
Article 9(5) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides: “5. If a Party fails without satisfactory explanation to produce
any Document requested in a Request to Produce to which it has not objected in due time or fails to produce any
Document ordered to be produced by the Arbitral Tribunal, the Arbitral Tribunal may infer that such document would
be adverse to the interests of that Party.” An adverse inference should not be considered as a “sanction” or punishment
for non-production, but is an indirect evidence, which should be assessed according to the general rules applicable to
any evidence, see Greenberge & Lautenschlager “Arbitral Interference in International Arbitral Practice” [2011] ICC
ICArb. Bull. Vol.22 No.2, p.43. Article 10 of the Prague Rules provides for the same possibility.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
