Testimony by video conferencing or telephone, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406911 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Testimony by video conferencing or telephone
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Testimony by video conferencing or telephone
26-44
Until the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020, the general rule was that in case of a physical hearing witnesses are
expected to be present in person at the evidentiary hearing. Therefore, any alternative arrangement is subject either to consent
of the parties or an order of the Tribunal. In issuing any order permitting video conferencing, the Tribunal will have to keep
in mind the importance of the witness, the approximate duration of his testimony, his relationship with the parties and the
requirements of due process 429  and the environmental impact. 430  Further, to hear a witness only by telephone would generally
be much less satisfactory, although witnesses are sometimes only heard by telephone, as the last recourse if neither the witness
physical presence nor videoconference are possible. The situation has changed as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic and virtual
hearings have become commonplace. As a result, the ICC has developed a “Checklist for a Protocol on Virtual Hearings and
Suggested Clauses for Cyber-Protocols and Procedural Orders dealing with the Organisation of Virtual Hearings”. 431  This
protocol addresses various issues under the following headings:
 
A.Prehearing Plan, Scope and Logistics
 
B.Technical Issues, Specifications, Requirements and Support Staff
 
C.Confidentiality, Privacy and Security
 
D.Online Etiquette and Due Process Considerations
 
E.Presentation of Evidence and Examination of Witnesses
26-45
Nevertheless, if to the extent that there it is possible to hold a hearing in person, if a party insists on questioning a key factual
witness for the other side who is in fact employed by the other side and does not have a convincing reason for not physically
attending the hearing, the Tribunal will generally give that insistence considerable weight. If the evidence to be provided is
that of a third party with no current relationship with the parties to the arbitration, the Tribunal will most likely take reasonable
steps to accommodate the witness to obtain his or her testimony. With respect to experts, testimony by video conferencing can
be quite satisfactory, even in the most complex technical disputes, although the party proposing the expert should consider
whether the expert’s impact would be reduced if he were not physically present. For an expert to go to a flip chart and make
a drawing to explain a point when questioned by the Tribunal is not something as easily available and intuitive when it comes
to a Zoom conferencing.
Footnotes
429
Schäfer, “Videoconferencing in Arbitration” [2003] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.14 No.1, p.35 describes in much detail the
many aspects a Tribunal needs to consider prior to authorising and proceeding with videoconferencing, in Grierson
& van Hooft, Arbitrating under the 2012 ICC Rules (Kluwer Law International, 2012), Part IV: Procedure Before the
Arbitral Tribunal, Ch.20: “The Evidentiary Hearing”, p.187. Verbist & Schäfer, ICC Arbitration in Practice, 2nd edn
(Kluwer Law International, 2015), Ch.3: “Arbitral Proceedings Under the ICC Rules of Arbitration of 2012”, p.103.
430
Normally, the shorter the witness statement, the shorter the likely duration of the witness’ examination. The cost and
inconvenience for a witness to travel to the hearing venue must be balanced also against the length of his testimony.
Having a witness cross the Atlantic for what might be just 30 minutes of examination, seems no longer reasonable

Testimony by video conferencing or telephone, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406911 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
and acceptable in most circumstances. In that regard see “The Campaign for Greener Arbitrations” initiated by Lucy
Greenwood in 2019, and the launch of a “Green Pledge” aimed at reducing the carbon footprint of international
arbitration. Six Green Protocols were launched in April 2021 regarding Arbitral Proceedings and Model Green
Procedural Order; Law Firms, Chambers and Legal Service Providers working in arbitration; Arbitrators; Arbitral
Institutions; Arbitration Conferences; and Arbitral Hearing Venues.
431
See Part II, Document 9.2. This checklist is very useful as a point of reference for the parties to confer on the terms of
an agreed protocol for a virtual hearing.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
