Introductory remarks, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406876 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Introductory remarks
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
23-1
Article 23 deals with the Terms of Reference. 292  The Terms of Reference have been and still are one of the hallmarks of ICC
arbitration. Until the 2017 Rules were issued, Terms of Reference were required in each ICC arbitration. That is no longer the
case. With the introduction of art.30 and the Expedited Procedure Provisions in the 2017 Rules, the requirement to have Terms
of Reference was abandoned for arbitrations that are conducted under the Expedited Procedure Provisions. In the 2017 Rules,
the Expedited Procedure Provisions were applicable subject to certain limitations with respect to claims with a value of up to
US$2 million. As discussed under art.30, that threshold has been increased to US$3 million in the 2021 Rules. The 2017 Rules
also reduced the time to prepare the Terms of Reference for all other ICC arbitrations from two months to one month. Some
might have seen the exclusion of Terms of Reference from Expedited Procedures in the 2017 Rules as a signal that the ICC
might abandon use of Terms of Reference altogether. Nevertheless, the 2021 Rules maintain the use of the Terms of Reference,
and in the authors’ view, rightly so.
23-2
As discussed in the Introduction and under art.19, one of the basic principles for an ICC arbitration is the autonomy of the
parties. The parties are free to set the procedure that they wish within the overall framework of the ICC Rules and the law of the
place of arbitration, taking into consideration, where appropriate and possible, the law of the probable place of enforcement.
In an ICC arbitration, arbitrators will set out some details of the procedure in the Terms of Reference and even more so in
procedural orders, in particular in the first procedural order that typically follows the first case management conference of the
Tribunal with the parties. 293
23-3
The Terms of Reference are to be signed by the parties and the Tribunal to indicate their agreement with the information set out
therein. The Terms of Reference are intended to provide an “agreed framework” for the arbitration. If, and only if, signed by all
parties, the Terms of Reference constitute a further agreement relating to the arbitration and will be enforceable as such. The
Terms of Reference can take the form of a “compromis” (or submission agreement), unless one party objects to the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal, although it signed the Terms of Reference. 294  In order to comply with the requirements of arts II and IV(1) of
the New York Convention, parties may consider including a special provision in the Terms of Reference providing that the Terms
of Reference confirm the arbitration clause in the contract concluded by the parties, and that each original copy of the Terms of
Reference shall form an original arbitration agreement for the purposes of arts II and IV(1) of the New York Convention.
23-4
Since the Terms of Reference are intended to provide an agreed framework, a party is not required to accept provisions that
go beyond the scope of the arbitration agreement. For example, a party may, but is not required to, agree to a provision on
confidentiality in the Terms of Reference, as the ICC Rules themselves contain no general confidentiality undertaking of the
parties. At the same time, as discussed later, a party should not object to inclusion of statements regarding the other party’s case
provided that it is clear that those statements are not accepted as such.
23-5
Tribunals may and usually do set out the detailed procedure for an arbitration in procedural orders rather than in the Terms of
Reference. Procedural orders are issued by the Tribunal and signed by the Tribunal or by the president of the Tribunal, if so
provided in the Terms of Reference, but not by the parties.

Introductory remarks, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406876 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
23-6
The Terms of Reference are aimed in particular at setting out the undisputed facts relating to the arbitration, the claims of the
parties and the issues to be decided at an early stage in the proceedings. More generally, the Terms of Reference are intended
to define the scope of the Tribunal’s mandate or mission so as to ensure that the award will not be rendered either ultra or infra
petita. The Terms of Reference are also linked to the provisional timetable for the proceedings. Generally, that timetable is
issued within a short time after the signing of the Terms of Reference.
23-7
As part of the administered and supervised arbitration, the ICC not only monitors the progress of cases but also scrutinises
awards under art.34. This monitoring and scrutiny is carried out by reference to the Terms of Reference as well as to the
correspondence between the Tribunal and the parties and to the procedural orders. When an award comes before the ICC Court
for scrutiny, the court is systematically provided with the Terms of Reference.
23-8
National courts refer to the Terms of Reference in deciding on annulment of awards. Especially if all parties sign them, the
Terms of Reference are seen as one of the best indications of the issues that the Tribunal was intended to deal with. The Terms
of Reference are frequently signed at the case-management conference discussed under art.24 or immediately thereafter if the
case management conference is conducted virtually. Usually, a copy of the Terms of Reference is signed for each party, for each
member of the Tribunal and for the Secretariat.
23-9
The reluctance to use the Terms of Reference for details of the procedure is mainly because any amendment of signed Terms of
Reference requires, unlike procedural orders, the consent of the parties. To avoid a subsequent debate with the parties whether
procedural rules contained in the Terms of Reference can unilaterally be amended and modified by the Tribunal, or whether the
parties’ agreement is required, it is best to leave any detailed procedural rules outside the Terms of Reference. If one were to
presume that they can only be amended by a further agreement between the parties, 295  this would give each party a veto over
changes to the procedural rules set out in the Terms of Reference. 296  This situation is to be contrasted with procedural orders
that are issued by the Tribunal and do not require the consent of the parties to be amended. Therefore, it will normally be much
more practical to have aspects of the procedure decided by the Tribunal rather than agreed to by the parties. 297  Nonetheless,
a Tribunal will almost always seek to consult the parties and try to obtain their consent on as many aspects of the procedure
as possible. 298
Footnotes
292
The 2021 Rules have left art.23 unchanged from the 2017 Rules except for a minor drafting change in art.23(2).
293
As to the latter, see art.24(1).
294
Cass Civ 1e, 6 January 1987, Southern Pacific Properties Ltd And Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd v The
Arab Republic of Egypt (1988) YBCA Vol. XIII p.152: “… the Court of Appeal, thus deciding on the assertions, decided
correctly, on the one hand, that the arbitration agreement could only be constituted by the arbitration clause inserted
in the contract of 12 December 1974 and not by the Terms of Reference, the object of which was only to define the
issues and, on the other hand, that the Terms of Reference, in which the Republic of Egypt maintained that there was
no arbitration agreement, could not replace such an agreement …”; see also Arnaldez, “L’acte déterminant la mission
de l’arbitre”, in Etudes offertes ,à Pierre Bellet, op. cit., at p.20.
295
Pursuant to arts 19 and 22, the Tribunal’s right to establish procedural rules is subject to an agreement of the parties,
and arguably signed terms of Reference constitute such agreement between the parties within the meaning of arts 19
and 22(2).
296
In the Bombardier Transportation case referred to at para.20-24, the party seeking annulment sought to argue that the
Tribunal had failed to respect a provision of the Terms of Reference requiring that documents be submitted in English
or French. The Paris Court of Appeal rejected the argument based in part on the flexibility that the Tribunal had retained
for itself in the Terms of Reference.

Introductory remarks, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406876 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
297
For a discussion of the issue of control of arbitration, see Webster, Party Control in International Arbitration, p.133.
298
See the discussion under art.22(2) at para.22-14 and following.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
