Document 1: Standard ICC Arbitration Clauses, UKBC-ICCARBN 516551563 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Document 1: Standard ICC Arbitration Clauses
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part II - Models, Precedents and Examples
Document 1: Standard ICC Arbitration Clauses 1
II-1
It is recommended that parties wishing to make reference to ICC Arbitration in their contracts use the standard clause below.
Standard ICC Arbitration Clause
All disputes arising out of or in connection with the present contract shall be finally settled under the Rules of
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce by one or more arbitrators appointed in accordance
with the said Rules.
Parties are free to adapt the clause to their particular circumstances. For instance, they may wish to stipulate the number of
arbitrators given that the ICC Arbitration Rules contain a presumption in favour of a sole arbitrator. Also, it may be desirable
for them to stipulate the place and language of the arbitration and the law applicable to the merits. The ICC Arbitration
Rules do not limit the parties’ free choice of the place and language of the arbitration or the law governing the contract.
When adapting the clause, care must be taken to avoid any risk of ambiguity. Unclear wording in the clause will cause
uncertainty and delay and can hinder or even compromise the dispute resolution process.
Parties should also take account of any factors that may affect the enforceability of the clause under applicable law.
These include any mandatory requirements that may exist at the place of arbitration and the expected place or places of
enforcement.
ICC Arbitration without Emergency Arbitrator
If the parties wish to exclude any recourse to the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions, they must expressly opt out by adding
the following wording to the clause above:
The Emergency Arbitrator Provisions shall not apply.
Expedited Arbitration
The ICC Arbitration Rules provide for use of an expedited procedure in lower-value cases. If parties wish to exclude the
application of the Expedited Procedure Provisions, they must expressly opt out by adding the following wording to the
clause above:
The Expedited Procedure Provisions shall not apply.
Parties wishing to avail themselves of the expedited procedure in higher-value cases should expressly opt in by adding
the following wording to the clause above:
The parties agree, pursuant to Article 30(2)(b) of the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of
Commerce, that the Expedited Procedure Rules shall apply irrespective of the amount in dispute.

Document 1: Standard ICC Arbitration Clauses, UKBC-ICCARBN 516551563 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
If parties wish the ceiling for the application of the Expedited Procedure Rules to be higher than that specified in those
Rules, the following wording should be added to the clause above:
The parties agree, pursuant to Article 30(2)(b) of the Rules of Arbitration of the International Chamber of
Commerce, that the Expedited Procedure Rules shall apply, provided the amount in dispute does not exceed
US$ [specify amount] at the time of the communication referred to in Article 1(3) of the Expedited Procedure
Rules.
Standard ICC Arbitration Clause without Publication of Awards
All disputes arising out of or in connection with the present contract shall be finally settled under the Rules of
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce by one or more arbitrators appointed in accordance
with the said Rules. No award or procedural order made in the arbitration shall be published.
Multi-tiered Clauses
ICC Arbitration may be used as the forum for final determination of a dispute following an attempt at settlement by other
means such as mediation. Parties wishing to include in their contracts a tiered dispute resolution clause combining ICC
Arbitration with ICC Mediation should refer to the standard clauses relating to the ICC Mediation Rules.
Other combinations of services are also possible. For instance, arbitration may be used as a fallback to expertise or dispute
boards. Also, parties who resort to ICC Arbitration may wish to provide for recourse to the ICC International Centre for
ADR for the proposal of an expert if an expert opinion is required in the course of the arbitration.
Other recommendations
The parties may also wish to stipulate in the arbitration clause:
 
• the law governing the contract;
 
• the number of arbitrators;
 
• the place of arbitration; and/or
 
• the language of the arbitration.
The standard clause can be modified in order to take account of the requirements of national laws and any other special
requirements that the parties may have. In particular, parties should always check for any mandatory arbitration. For
example, it is prudent for parties wishing to have an ICC Arbitration in Mainland China to include in their arbitration
clause an explicit reference to the ICC International Court of Arbitration.
The following language is suggested for this purpose:
“All disputes arising out of or in connection with the present contract shall be submitted to the International
Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce and shall be finally settled under the Rules
of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce by one or more arbitrators appointed in accordance
with the said Rules.”
Make special arrangements where the contract or transaction involves more than two parties.

Document 1: Standard ICC Arbitration Clauses, UKBC-ICCARBN 516551563 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Footnotes
1
© International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). Reproduced with kind permission of ICC. The text reproduced here is
valid at the time of reproduction in July 2021. As amendments may be made to the text, please refer to the website
https://iccwbo.org/dispute-resolution-services for the latest version and for more information on ICC dispute resolution
services. Also available in the ICC Digital Library at http://library.iccwbo.org.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
