Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 3 - Applicable Laws
Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration
(a) Introduction
3. 42
An international arbitration usually takes place in a country that is ‘neutral’, in the sense that none of the parties to the arbitration
has a place of business or residence there. 53  This means that, in practice, the procedural law of the country in whose territory
the arbitration takes place—that is, the lex arbitri—will generally be different from the law that governs the substantive matters
in dispute. An arbitral tribunal with a seat in the Netherlands, for example, may be required to decide the substantive issues in
dispute between the parties in accordance with the law of Switzerland or the law of New York or some other law, as the case
may be. Nevertheless, the arbitration itself, and the way in which it is conducted, will be governed (if only in outline) by the
relevant Dutch law on international arbitration.
3. 43
This difference between the lex arbitri (the law of the place, or ‘seat’, of the arbitration) and the law governing the substance of
the dispute was part of the juridical tradition of continental Europe, but is now firmly established in international arbitration. 54
3. 44
It is right that there should be a distinction between the lex arbitri and the substantive law of the contract. Where parties to an
international arbitration agreement choose for themselves a seat of arbitration, they usually choose a place that has no connection
with either themselves or their commercial relationship. They choose a ‘neutral’ place. By doing so, they do not necessarily
intend to choose the law of that place to govern their relationship. 55  Indeed, as well as choosing a place of arbitration, they
may well choose a substantive law that has no connection with that place.
3. 45
If the parties do not make an express choice of the place of arbitration, the choice will have to be made for them, either by the
arbitral tribunal itself or by a designated arbitral institution. The UNCITRAL Rules, for instance, state: ‘If the parties have not
previously agreed on the place of arbitration, the place of arbitration shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal having regard
to the circumstances of the case.’ 56  Similarly, Article 18.1 of the ICC Rules leaves the choice to the ICC Court. 57
3. 46
In cases of this kind, the place of arbitration will usually be determined by reference to the priority of neutrality as between
the parties, and choosing a place that can provide a supportive and reliable supervisory jurisdiction to the arbitration process.
In such circumstances, it would be illogical to hold that the lex arbitri, as the law of the place of arbitration, was necessarily
the law applicable to the issues in dispute.
(b) What is the lex arbitri?
3. 47
It is appropriate, at this stage, to consider what is meant by the lex arbitri. The question was posed rhetorically by a distinguished
English judge:

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
What then is the law governing the arbitration? It is, as [the present authors] trenchantly explain, 58  a body of rules
which sets a standard external to the arbitration agreement, and the wishes of the parties, for the conduct of the
arbitration. The law governing the arbitration comprises the rules governing interim measures (eg Court orders for
the preservation or storage of goods), the rules empowering the exercise by the Court of supportive measures to
assist an arbitration which has run into difficulties (eg filling a vacancy in the composition of the arbitral tribunal
if there is no other mechanism) and the rules providing for the exercise by the Court of its supervisory jurisdiction
over arbitrations (eg removing an arbitrator for misconduct). 59
(i) The content of the lex arbitri
3. 48
Each state will decide for itself what laws it wishes to lay down to govern the conduct of arbitrations within its own territory.
Some states will wish to build an element of consumer protection into their law, so as to protect private individuals. For
example, the Swedish Arbitration Act provides that an arbitration agreement with a consumer involving goods or services
for private use is invalid if made before a dispute arises. 60  Similarly, the same Act provides that the arbitral tribunal may
order the parties to pay the arbitrators’ fees and, if it does so, must set out in its final award its decision as to the fees payable
to each of the arbitrators. 61  The arbitral tribunal must also provide clear instruction to the parties of the steps that must be
taken to appeal to the district court against this decision. 62
3. 49
In recognition of the distinction between domestic arbitration and international arbitration—in which the sums at issue
are likely to be larger and the parties better able to look after themselves—some states have (sensibly, it may be thought)
introduced a code of law specifically designed for international arbitrations. The French Code of Civil Procedure, for example,
includes a specific chapter on international arbitration, 63  Australia has adopted an International Arbitration Act 1974, and
Switzerland has adopted the Swiss PIL.
3. 50
Reference has already been made to the Model Law, which the authors have described as the baseline for any state wishing
to modernise its law of arbitration. 64  Many jurisdictions incorporate the Model Law into their national arbitration laws.
Australia, for example, expressly incorporates the Model Law into Australian law. 65  The provisions of the Model Law are
drawn in relatively broad terms. They do not purport to lay down any detailed procedural rules as to the actual conduct of
an arbitration—such as rules on the submission and exchange of witness statements, the order in which witnesses are to be
called, the time to be allotted for the questioning and cross-questioning of witnesses, and so forth. Indeed, the Model Law
expressly provides that:
 
(1)Subject to the provisions of this Law, the parties are free to agree on the procedure to be followed by the arbitral
tribunal in conducting the proceedings.
 
(2)Failing such agreement, the arbitral tribunal may, subject to the provisions of this Law, conduct the arbitration in such
manner as it considers appropriate. The power conferred upon the arbitral tribunal includes the power to determine the
admissibility, relevance, materiality and weight of any evidence. 66
3. 51
It may be helpful at this point to give examples of the matters with which the lex arbitri might be expected to deal, although
the exact position under the relevant lex arbitri should be checked, particularly where these legal provisions are mandatory.
With this qualification, the lex arbitri is likely to extend to:
 
i.the definition and form of an agreement to arbitrate;
 
ii.whether a dispute is capable of being referred to arbitration (that is, whether it is ‘arbitrable’ under the lex arbitri);

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
iii.the constitution of the arbitral tribunal and any grounds for challenge of that tribunal;
 
iv.the entitlement of the arbitral tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction;
 
v.equal treatment of the parties;
 
vi.freedom to agree upon detailed rules of procedure;
 
vii.interim measures of protection;
 
viii.statements of claim and defence;
 
ix.hearings, including the permissibility of virtual hearings;
 
x.default proceedings;
 
xi.court assistance, if required;
 
xii.the powers of the arbitrators, including any powers to decide as amiables compositeurs;
 
xiii.the form and validity of the arbitration award; and
 
xiv.the finality of the award, including any right to challenge it in the courts of the place of arbitration.
3. 52
These are all important aspects of international arbitration. They may well arise in practice and are all addressed later in this
commentary. Three essential points should, however, be made now.
3. 53
First, the effective conduct of an international arbitration may depend upon the provisions of the law of the place of arbitration.
One way of illustrating this dependence is by reference to any provisions of the local law for judicial assistance in the
conduct of the arbitration. Even if the arbitrators have the power to order interim measures of protection, such as orders for
the preservation and inspection of property, they are unlikely to have the power to enforce such orders—particularly if the
property in question is in the possession of a third party. For this, it is necessary to turn to national courts for assistance. 67
3. 54
Second, the choice of a particular place of arbitration may have important and unintended consequences. This is because the
law of that place may confer powers on the courts or on the arbitrators that the parties did not expect, or may deprive an
arbitral tribunal of powers that the parties might otherwise have assumed existed.
 
i.On this latter point, one example is the power to consolidate arbitrations. Whether or not a court or arbitral tribunal
has the power to consolidate two or more arbitrations that involve the same basic issues of fact or law is a controversial
question. In the present context, it is necessary to note only that such a power may exist under the lex arbitri and that
this may come as a disagreeable surprise to a party who does not wish to have other parties joined in its arbitration. 68
 
ii.Another example arises in the context of sanctions, since it may be that a tribunal is compelled to take into account
legal sanctions relevant to the parties’ dispute because they form part of the mandatory law of the lex arbitri. 69
3. 55
Third, there is an obvious prospect of conflict between the lex arbitri and a different system of law that may be equally
relevant. Consider, for example, the question of arbitrability—that is, whether or not the subject matter of the dispute is
‘capable’ of being resolved by arbitration. The concept of arbitrability, as we have already discussed, 70  is basic to the arbitral
process. Both the New York Convention and the Model Law refer explicitly to disputes that are ‘capable of being resolved
by arbitration’—that is to say, to disputes that are ‘arbitrable’ in the proper sense of that term.
3. 56
On the question of arbitrability, it may be said that if a dispute is capable of being resolved by litigation in the courts, surely
the same dispute is equally ‘capable’ of being resolved by arbitration? Theoretically, this may well be correct. In practice,
however, every state reserves for itself, as a matter of public policy, what might be called a ‘state monopoly’ over certain

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
types of dispute. Accordingly, whether or not a particular dispute—for example over the disposal of assets belonging to a
bankrupt company—is legally ‘capable of being resolved by arbitration’ is a matter that each state will decide for itself. It is
a matter on which states may well differ, with some taking a more restrictive attitude than others. This obviously results in an
element of forum shopping; and incidentally may be ‘good for business’ for those jurisdictions adopting a liberal approach
to what disputes are ‘arbitrable’. It should be borne in mind, however (and this may be important if it becomes necessary
to seek enforcement of an award) that a claim that is arbitrable both under the law governing the arbitration agreement and
under the lex arbitri may not be regarded as arbitrable under the law of the place of enforcement. An award in such a case,
although validly made under the lex arbitri, might prove to be unenforceable under the New York Convention.
(ii) Procedural rules and the lex arbitri
3. 57
The preceding discussion about the content of the lex arbitri indicates that most, if not all, national laws governing arbitration
deal with general propositions, such as the need to treat each party equally, rather than with detailed rules of procedure,
such as the time for exchange of witness statements or the submission of pre-hearing briefs. The Swiss PIL provides that
‘[t]he parties may, directly or by reference to arbitration rules, determine the arbitral procedure; they may also submit it to a
procedural law of their choice’. 71  Similarly, the English Arbitration Act 1996, provides that ‘parties should be free to agree
how their disputes are resolved, subject only to such safeguards as are necessary in the public interest’. 72
3. 58
At some stage in the conduct of an arbitration—and, indeed, at a fairly early stage—the parties will need to know where they
stand in terms of the detailed procedure to be followed. There are many points to be clarified: will the claimant’s statement
of claim simply outline the facts supporting the claim, or will it be accompanied by the documents that are relied upon and
perhaps by legal submissions? When the respondent has submitted its defence, will the claimant have the right to submit
a reply, or is that the end of the written submissions? What about the evidence of witnesses and experts? Will there be
opportunities to make document production requests?
3. 59
It is plainly necessary for the parties and the arbitral tribunal to know what procedural rules they are required to follow,
particularly in an international arbitration in which the parties will usually come from different backgrounds with a different
approach to such questions as the interviewing of witnesses, the production of documents, and so forth. All that needs to be
understood at this point is that there is a great difference between the general provisions of the law governing the arbitration
(the lex arbitri) and the detailed procedural rules that will need to be adopted, or adapted, for the fair and efficient conduct
of the proceedings. The rules of the arbitral institutions, such as the ICC and the LCIA, provide an overall framework
within which to operate, as do the UNCITRAL Rules. However, it is important to note that even these rules will need to be
supplemented by more detailed provisions by the parties or the arbitral tribunal, as discussed in Chapter 6.
3. 60
It is therefore often advisable, particularly where parties and their counsel are from different legal backgrounds, to agree such
rules at the outset of an arbitration. This may be done by agreement of the parties, or by order of the arbitral tribunal at the
first procedural meeting. As part of this process, the parties may agree, or the arbitral tribunal may order, that they adopt
or have regard to a pre-existing set of detailed rules, for example the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Arbitration. 73  By ensuring that the rules are clearly established early on, the administration of the case will (or at least should)
be simplified, and the scope for delay and dilatory tactics reduced.
3. 61
The choice of detailed procedural rules raises two issues relevant to this discussion of applicable law. The first is that, as
noted in the foregoing, the detailed procedural rules do not displace the lex arbitri, rather they apply concurrently. This gives
rise to the possibility of a conflict between the two sets of procedural rules and, in these circumstances a tribunal will need to
ascertain which law prevails. Where the relevant provision of the lex arbitri is mandatory, it will prevail. Some institutional
rules pre-empt this scenario: for example, the UNCITRAL Rules provide that the mandatory provisions of the lex arbitri shall
prevail over the UNCITRAL Rules in the event of any conflict. 74

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
3. 62
A second issue arises where the institutional rules adopted to govern an arbitration are subject to a requirement that they be
interpreted in accordance with a particular national law that differs from the lex arbitri. The LCIA Rules, for example, must be
interpreted in accordance with the laws of England. 75  This is another source of concurrently applicable laws and, in theory
at least, may give rise to conflicts. Thus, in an arbitration governed by LCIA Rules, a tribunal seated in a foreign jurisdiction
will be obliged to interpret the LCIA Rules in accordance with the laws of England. As one commentator has noted:
The highly specific inclusion of the laws of England as the means of interpretation of the LCIA Rules could
potentially foreshadow arguments about their implementation in cases where the seat of arbitration is not
England, and/or where the parties have chosen a specific law, which is not English law, to govern their
Arbitration Agreement. Particularly, Arbitral Tribunals and/or other relevant foreign courts may encounter
difficulties in reconciling the new requirements to interpret the LCIA Rules in accordance with English law
while maintaining their obligations to apply the mandatory procedural law of the arbitral seat. 76
(c) Seat theory
3. 63
The concept that an arbitration is governed by the law of the place in which it is held, which is the ‘seat’ (or ‘forum’, or locus
arbitri) of the arbitration, is well established in both the theory and practice of international arbitration. 77  It has influenced the
wording of international conventions from the Geneva Protocol of 1923 (the Geneva Protocol) to the New York Convention.
3. 64
The Geneva Protocol states: ‘The arbitral procedure, including the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, shall be governed by the
will of the parties and by the law of the country in whose territory the arbitration takes place’. 78  The New York Convention 79
maintains the reference to ‘the law of the country where the arbitration took place’ 80  and, synonymously, to ‘the law of the
country where the award is made’. 81  This continues the clear territorial link between the place of arbitration and the law
governing that arbitration: the lex arbitri. This territorial link is again maintained in the Model Law: ‘The provisions of this
Law, except articles 8, 9, 35 and 36, apply only if the place of arbitration is in the territory of this State.’ 82
3. 65
Several modern laws on arbitration are clear on the link between the seat of the arbitration and the lex arbitri. Swiss law, for
example, states:
The provisions of this Chapter apply to arbitral tribunals that have their seat in Switzerland if, at the time that
the arbitration agreement was concluded, at least one of the parties thereto did not have its domicile, its habitual
residence or its seat in Switzerland. 83
3. 66
Likewise, a majority of the provisions of German arbitration law apply only to arbitrations which have a place of arbitration
in Germany. 84  A similar approach is taken in Belgium, 85  India, 86  and Malaysia. 87  In English law, certain provisions of the
Arbitration Act apply only where the seat of the arbitration is in England, Wales, or Northern Ireland, whereas other provisions
(for example, for the stay of court proceedings commenced in breach of an arbitration agreement) apply even if the seat of the
arbitration is not in those countries or if no seat has been designated. 88  The seat of the arbitration is defined as ‘the juridical
seat of the arbitration’ designated by the parties, or by an arbitral institution or the arbitrators themselves, as the case may be. 89
Unless the parties agree otherwise, the seat of the arbitration must be stated in the award of the arbitrators. 90

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
3. 67
As this introduction tries to make clear, the place, or ‘seat’, of the arbitration is not merely a matter of geography. It is the
territorial link between the arbitration itself and the law of the place in which that arbitration is legally situated:
When one says that London, Paris or Geneva is the place of arbitration, one does not refer solely to a geographical
location. One means that the arbitration is conducted within the framework of the law of arbitration of England,
France or Switzerland or, to use an English expression, under the curial law of the relevant country. The
geographical place of arbitration is the factual connecting factor between that arbitration law and the arbitration
proper, considered as a nexus of contractual and procedural rights and obligations between the parties and the
arbitrators. 91
The seat of an arbitration is thus often intended to be its legal centre of gravity. This does not mean that all of the proceedings
of the arbitration have to take place there, although preferably some should do so. 92
Although the choice of a ‘seat’ also indicates the geographical place for the arbitration, this does not mean that
the parties have limited themselves to that place. As is pointed out[ 93  …] in a passage approved by the Court of
Appeal in Naviera Amazonia Peruana SA v Compania Internacional de Seguros del Peru [1988] 1 Lloyd’s Rep
116 at 121, it may often be convenient to hold meetings or even hearings in other countries. This does not mean
that the ‘seat’ of the arbitration changes with each change of country. The legal place of the arbitration remains
the same even if the physical place changes from time to time, unless of course the parties agree to change it. 94
3. 68
Arbitrators and the parties to an international arbitration often come from different countries. It may not always be convenient
for everyone concerned to travel to the country that is the seat of the arbitration for the purpose of a meeting or a hearing. There
may be limitations on the ability of those involved in an arbitration to travel to a particular location. Alternatively, it may simply
be easier and less expensive to meet elsewhere, or the parties and tribunal may be conscious of reducing, where practical and
possible, the environmental footprint of their arbitral proceedings. In recognition of this reality, various procedural laws and
rules now provide parties with the flexibility to hold meetings and hearings other than in-person and in the place (or seat) of
the arbitration. For example, the ICC Rules read as follows:
 
1)The place of the arbitration shall be fixed by the Court, unless agreed upon by the parties.
 
2)The arbitral tribunal may, after consulting the parties, conduct hearings and meetings at any location it considers
appropriate, unless otherwise agreed by the parties.
 
3)The arbitral tribunal may deliberate at any location it considers appropriate. 95
3. 69
The ICC Rules further state that:
The arbitral tribunal may decide, after consulting the parties, and on the basis of the relevant facts and
circumstances of the case, that any hearing will be conducted by physical attendance or remotely by
videoconference, telephone or other appropriate means of communication. 96
3. 70
The UNCITRAL Rules allow arbitrators to meet at any appropriate locations for deliberations, and provides that meetings ‘for
any other purpose, including hearings may take place in any location, unless agreed otherwise by the parties’. 97  The LCIA
has a similar rule:
If any hearing is to be held in person, the Arbitral Tribunal may hold such hearing at any convenient geographical
place in consultation with the parties. If the Arbitral Tribunal is to meet in person to hold its deliberations, it
may do so at any geographical place of its own choice. If such place(s) should be elsewhere than the seat of

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
the arbitration, or if any hearing or deliberation takes place otherwise than in person (in whole or in part), the
arbitration shall nonetheless be treated for all purposes as an arbitration conducted at the arbitral seat and any
order or award as having been made at that seat. 98
The Model Law also allows the arbitral tribunal to meet at any place it considers appropriate for its deliberations or to hear
witnesses, unless the parties object. 99
3. 71
These are sensible provisions. They recognise the realities of international arbitration, with parties, lawyers, and arbitrators
likely to be based in different parts of the world. They give flexibility to the tribunal and to the parties in selecting a convenient
location for procedural meetings, hearings, and deliberations or to decide to hold their proceedings virtually, either in part or in
full. It may be, for example, that although the seat of the arbitration is Jakarta, the arbitral tribunal finds it convenient to meet
to hold hearings in Singapore. 100  In international construction disputes, it is often necessary for an arbitral tribunal sitting in
one country to visit the site of the project in another country to carry out an inspection. Equally, it may be more convenient for
an arbitral tribunal sitting in one country to conduct a hearing in another country or continent, for example for the purpose of
taking evidence. Virtual proceedings can help avoid delays if one or more arbitrator or party is unable to travel.
3. 72
Enabling flexibility in the geographic location of hearings can also avoid practical difficulties created by mandatory provisions
of the national law of the seat. As one commentary notes by way of example, local restrictions on who can appear as counsel
in court and arbitral proceedings is a ‘very important consideration’. In Nigeria, for example, only locally qualified ‘legal
practitioners’ may appear as counsel at hearings. 101
3. 73
An arbitral tribunal that visits another country must, of course, respect the law of that country. For example, if the purpose of the
visit is to take evidence from witnesses, the arbitral tribunal should respect any provisions of the local law that govern the taking
of evidence. 102  However, each move of the arbitral tribunal does not of itself mean that the seat of the arbitration changes. The
seat of the arbitration remains the place initially agreed by, or on behalf of, the parties. 103
3. 74
What is the legal position if, as sometimes happens, the arbitral tribunal—having consulted the parties and perhaps against the
objection of one of them—holds all meetings, hearings, and deliberations in a place that is not the seat of the arbitration or
entirely remotely? To proceed in this manner reduces the seat of the arbitration to a legal fiction: a place of arbitration in which
no physical meetings or hearings take place. In the light of the provisions set out above, and subject to any particular restrictions
contained in the lex arbitri and the views of the parties, 104  this would seem to be permissible. It conforms with the letter, if not
the spirit, of the law or the applicable rules. As aptly stated by the UK Supreme Court:
[T]he seat of an arbitration is a legal concept rather than a physical one. A choice of place as the seat does not
dictate that hearings must be held, or that any award must actually be issued, in that place. [ … ] The point of
agreeing to a seat is to agree that the law and courts of a particular country will exercise control over an arbitration
which has its seat in that country to the extent provided for by that country’s law. 105
(i) Is the lex arbitri a procedural law?
3. 75
In some countries, the law governing arbitration, including international arbitration, is part of a code of civil procedure. This
is so, for example, in France and in Germany—and it is sometimes said that the lex arbitri is a law of procedure, as if that is
all that it is. It is true, of course, that the lex arbitri may deal with procedural matters—such as the constitution of an arbitral
tribunal where there is no relevant contractual provision—but the authors suggest that the lex arbitri is much more than a

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
purely procedural law. Whilst also governing the procedure of the arbitration, it may, in addition, stipulate that a given type
of dispute—over patent rights, for instance, or (as in Belgium and some Arab states) over a local agency agreement—is
not capable of settlement by arbitration under the local law. This is surely not simply a matter of procedure? 106  Or again,
by way of example, an award may be set aside on the basis that it is contrary to the public policy of the lex arbitri. Once
more, this would not seem to be merely a matter of procedure. One commentary has accordingly described the function of
the lex arbitri as governing the ‘internal’ procedure of the arbitration as well as the ‘external’ oversight of the arbitration
by national courts. 107
3. 76
It is also sometimes said that parties have selected the procedural law that will govern their arbitration by providing for
arbitration in a particular country. 108  This is too elliptical and, as an English court itself held in Braes of Doune Wind
Farm, 109  it does not always hold true. What the parties have done is to choose a place of arbitration. That choice brings with
it submission to the laws of that country, including any mandatory provisions of its law on arbitration. To say that the parties
have ‘chosen’ that particular law to govern the arbitration is rather like saying that an English car driver who takes their car
to France has ‘chosen’ French traffic law, which will oblige them to drive on the right-hand side of the road, to give priority
to vehicles approaching from the right, and generally to obey traffic laws to which they may not be accustomed.
3. 77
Parties may well choose a particular place of arbitration precisely because its lex arbitri is one that they find attractive. 110
Nevertheless, once a place of arbitration has been chosen, it brings with it its own law. If that law contains provisions that are
mandatory as far as arbitrations are concerned, those provisions must be obeyed. 111  It is not a matter of choice, any more
than the notional motorist is free to choose which local traffic laws to obey and which to disregard.
(ii) Choice of another procedural law
3. 78
The concept of subjecting an arbitration in one state to the procedural law of another has been the subject of much theoretical
discussion. Thus, for example, an arbitration could be seated in Switzerland, but by agreement between the parties, made
subject to the procedural law of Germany. In this regard, Swiss law provides that the parties to an arbitration may ‘make
the procedure subject to a procedural law of their choice’. 112  Similarly, the French Code of Civil Procedure recognises the
possibility that parties may choose a different law to apply to the procedure of arbitrations located in France, and that the
French Code of Civil Procedure might apply as the procedural law in arbitrations located abroad. 113
3. 79
It is not easy to understand why parties should wish to complicate the conduct of an arbitration in this way (unless, as is
possible, they do not understand what they are doing). It means that the parties and the arbitral tribunal would need to have
regard to two procedural laws: that of Germany, as the chosen procedural law; and that of Switzerland, to the extent that the
provisions of Swiss law (such as the requirement of equality of treatment of the parties) are mandatory. 114  Nor is this all:
if it becomes necessary during the course of the arbitration to have recourse to the courts—for example on a challenge of
one of the arbitrators—to which court would the complainant go? The Swiss court would presumably be reluctant to give a
ruling on German procedural law; the German court might well prove unwilling to give a ruling on a procedural matter that
it could not directly enforce, since the arbitration was not conducted within its territorial jurisdiction.
3. 80
It is tempting to suggest that if the procedural law of a particular country is either so attractive or so familiar to the parties
that they wish to adopt it, they would do better to locate their arbitration in that country. One needs only to consider the
difficulties that a party would face in obtaining a subpoena against a reluctant witness, however, to recognise the problems
inherent in a choice of foreign procedural law. 115
3. 81

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
In a Peruvian insurance case, 116  the English Court of Appeal considered a contract that had been held by the court of first
instance to provide for an arbitration to be located in Peru, but subject to English procedural law. The Court of Appeal
construed the contract as providing for arbitration in London under English law, but noted that a situation involving a choice
of foreign procedural law was theoretically possible. However, practical difficulties were foreseen:
There is equally no reason in theory which precludes parties to agree that an arbitration shall be held at a place
or in country X but subject to the procedural laws of Y. The limits and implications of any such agreement
have been much discussed in the literature, but apart from the decision in the instant case there appears to
be no reported case where this has happened. This is not surprising when one considers the complexities and
inconveniences which such an agreement would involve. Thus, at any rate under the principles of English law,
which rest upon the territorially limited jurisdiction of our courts, an agreement to arbitrate in X subject to
English procedural law would not empower our courts to exercise jurisdiction over the arbitration in X. 117
(d) Where an award is made
3. 82
From time to time, it may become necessary to determine where an award is made. The point is an important one. For example,
recognition and enforcement of an award may be refused on the basis that the arbitration agreement was not valid under the
law of the country where the award was made, or on the basis that the award itself had been ‘set aside or suspended’ by a court
of the country in which it was made. 118
3. 83
In practice, it is rare for parties to stipulate the country in which an award is to be deemed made. Rather, it is more common for
parties to identify the place of the arbitration, and for that national law to contain terms that indicate where an award is treated
as being made. The English Arbitration Act, for example, provides that:
Arrangement of Act
Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where the seat of the arbitration is in England and Wales or Northern
Ireland, any award in the proceedings shall be treated as made there, regardless of where it was signed,
despatched or delivered to any of the parties.
3. 84
The Model Law contains a similar provision, 120  as does the Netherlands Arbitration Act. 121  Some arbitration rules also deal
expressly with the place at which an award is ‘made’. For example, the ICC Rules provide that an award is deemed to be made
at the place (or seat) of the arbitration and on the date stated therein. 122  The UNCITRAL Rules 2010 state similarly that an
award ‘shall be deemed to have been made at the place of arbitration’. 123  The 2010 Rules differ from the 1976 Rules, which
stated that an award ‘shall be made at the place of arbitration’, which commentators believed ‘could have been construed to
require the signing at the place of arbitration’, contrary to the drafters’ intention to establish a legal framework. 124
3. 85
Automatically equating the place of an arbitration with the place where an award is made avoids the need for arbitrators to be
physically present in one particular jurisdiction when signing the award. This is a sensible provision when arbitrators who live
in different countries may well have agreed on the final terms of the award by email or other forms of communication. In an
international arbitration, with a tribunal of three arbitrators, the award in its final form may well be signed in three different
countries, each member of the tribunal adding his or her signature in turn. Even where not specifically provided for in the
applicable procedural rules, there is a strong argument that, in such circumstances, the award should be deemed to have been
made at the seat of the arbitration:

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
The award, it is submitted, is no more than a part, the final and vital part of a procedure which must have a
territorial, central point or seat. It would be very odd if, possibly without the knowledge of the parties or even
unwittingly, the arbitrators had the power to sever that part from the preceding procedure and thus give a totally
different character to the whole. 125
(e) Delocalisation
(i) Introduction
3. 86
An alternative to the ‘seat’ theory described above is one that delocalises arbitration from any national jurisdiction. As far as
international arbitration is concerned, it would save considerable time, trouble, and expense if the laws governing arbitrations
were the same throughout the world, so that there were—so to speak—a universal lex arbitri. There would then be a ‘level
playing field’ for the conduct of international arbitrations wherever they took place. An arbitral tribunal would not have to
enquire whether there were any special provisions governing arbitration that were peculiar to the law of the country that was
the seat of the arbitration. On this aspect of the arbitral process, all laws would be the same.
3. 87
In practice, however, the idea of a universal lex arbitri is as illusory as that of universal peace. Each state has its own
national characteristics, its own interests to protect, and its own concepts of how arbitrations should be conducted in its
territory. Although the Model Law offers states a simple, yet well-recognised approach to reaching a common standard for
the practice of international arbitration, certain states that have adopted the Model Law have been unable to resist adding their
own particular provisions to it. 126  Also, states with a long history of arbitration, and a highly developed law and practice,
are particularly unlikely to adopt simplified models that may, in themselves, create fresh problems. 127  Nevertheless, it is
inconvenient (to put it no higher) that the regulation of international arbitration should differ from one country to another—
and this has led to the search for an escape route.
3. 88
In this connection, two separate developments are seen. The first is for the state to relax the control that it seeks to exercise
over international arbitrations conducted on its territory. This is the route taken by modern laws of arbitration. These laws take
careful note of the theme of the Model Law, which is that their courts should not intervene in arbitrations unless authorised
to do so. The role of the courts should be supportive, not interventionist. 128
3. 89
The second development is to detach an international arbitration from control by the law of the place in which it is held.
This is the so-called delocalisation theory, the idea being that instead of a dual system of control, first by the lex arbitri and
then by the courts of the place of enforcement of the award, there should be only one point of control: that of the place of
enforcement. In this way, the whole world (or most of it) would be available for international arbitrations, and international
arbitration itself would be ‘supranational’, ‘anational’, ‘transnational’, ‘delocalised’, or even ‘expatriate’. More poetically,
such an arbitration would be a ‘floating arbitration’, resulting in a ‘floating award’. 129
3. 90
A judicial manifestation of the delocalisation theory is provided by the French Court of Cassation, which, in enforcing an
arbitral award set aside by the English High Court, held that:

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
[A] n international arbitral award, which does not belong to any state legal system, is an international decision of
justice and its validity must be examined according to the applicable rules of the country where its recognition
and enforcement are sought. 130
As noted earlier, this French approach was considered by the UK Supreme Court in Dallah Real Estate, in which, without
endorsing such an approach under English law, the Court noted that, under French law, ‘arbitration agreements derive their
existence, validity and effect from supra-national law, without it being necessary to refer to any national law’. 131
3. 91
The delocalisation theory takes as its starting point the autonomy of the parties—the fact that it is their agreement to arbitrate
that brings the proceedings into being—and rests upon two basic (yet frequently confused) arguments. 132  The first assumes
that international arbitration is sufficiently regulated by its own rules, which are either adopted by the parties (as an expression
of their autonomy) or drawn up by the arbitral tribunal itself. The second assumes that control should come only from the
law of the place of enforcement of the award. These two arguments are considered in more detail, below.
(ii) Arguments in favour of delocalisation considered
3. 92
The first argument is, in effect, that an international arbitration is self-regulating and that this is, or should be, sufficient. This
is a view that finds some support in a decision of the Supreme Court of Canada, which has held that:
The neutrality of arbitration as an institution is one of the fundamental characteristics of this alternative dispute
resolution mechanism. Unlike the foreign element, which suggests a possible connection with a foreign state,
arbitration is an institution without a forum and without a geographical basis. [ … ] Arbitration is part of no
state’s judicial system [ … ] The arbitrator has no allegiance or connection to any single country [ … ] In short,
arbitration is a creature that owes its existence to the will of the parties alone. 133
3. 93
It is true that the parties to an international arbitration will generally (but not always) have a set of procedural rules to
follow, whether they are those of an arbitral institution or are formulated ad hoc. It is also true that the arbitral tribunal will
generally (but again, not always) have the power to fill any gaps in these rules by giving procedural directions—and this set
of rules, whether agreed by the parties or laid down by the arbitral tribunal, may perhaps be said to constitute ‘the law of the
arbitration’, in the same way as a contract may be said to constitute ‘the law of the parties’. Finally, when the arbitration is
being administered by an arbitral institution (such as the ICC or LCIA), that institution may be said to have taken over the
state’s regulatory functions to a large extent, by itself laying down rules for the confirmation or removal of arbitrators, terms
of reference, time limits, scrutiny of awards, and so on. 134
3. 94
Most arbitrations are conducted without any reference to the law that governs them. Nonetheless, to repeat a point that has
already been made, this law—the lex arbitri—exists. 135  Its support may be needed not only to fill any gaps in the arbitral
process (such as the appointment of arbitrators), but also to give the force of law to orders of the arbitral tribunal that reach
beyond the parties themselves, for example for the ‘freezing’ of a bank account or for the detention of goods. More crucially,
this law will confer its nationality on the award of the arbitral tribunal, so that it is recognised, for example, as a Swiss award
or a Dutch award and may benefit from any international treaties (such as the New York Convention) to which its country
of origin is a party.
3. 95
The second argument in support of the delocalisation theory is that any control of the process of international arbitration
should come only at the place of enforcement of the award. If this were the position, it would mean that the place of arbitration

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
would be, in legal terms, irrelevant. This may or may not be a desirable solution—but it is significant that one state, Belgium,
which had compulsorily ‘delocalised’ international arbitrations has since changed its mind. 136  For the rest, the prevailing
emphasis, both nationally and internationally, is on a necessary connection between the place of arbitration and the law of
that place. This may be seen, as has already been demonstrated, in the New York Convention 137  and in the Model Law. 138
(iii) The position in reality
3. 96
The delocalisation theory has attracted powerful and eloquent advocates. Professor Gaillard described this ‘representation’
of international arbitration as follows:
[It] accepts the idea that the juridicity of arbitration is rooted in a distinct, transnational legal order, that could
be labelled as the arbitral legal order, and not in a national system, be it that of the country of the seat or that
of the place or places of enforcement. This representation corresponds to the international arbitrators’ strong
perception that they do not administer justice on behalf of any given State, but that they nonetheless play a
judicial role for the benefit of the international community. 139
3. 97
Seductive as such theories might be, the reality is that the delocalisation of arbitrations—other than those, like those of ICSID,
which are governed directly by international law—is possible only if the local law (the lex arbitri) permits it. Assessing the
theory of ‘delocalisation’, Professor Paulsson concludes in his treatise The Idea of Arbitration as follows:
[T]he development of international arbitration owes a disproportionately large debt to French law and to the
conceptual advances of French judges and scholars. Nowhere else have the twin lodestars of freedom and
internationalization combined in the conception of a voluntary process that accommodates the reality of a
transnational society, shone so bright. Yet the zeal of those who make extravagant claims may do more harm
than the resistance of non-believers and scoffers. The proposition that an effective legal order may be built upon
diaphanous abstractions like positive perspectives or transnational dynamics are more likely to impede than to
facilitate respect for the arbitral process. 140
(iv) Seat theory and the lex arbitri
3. 98
The strength of the seat theory is that it gives an established legal framework to an international arbitration, so that instead
of ‘floating in the transnational firmament, unconnected with any municipal system of law’, 141  the arbitration is firmly
anchored in a given legal system. Just as the law of contracts helps to ensure that contracts are performed as they should
be and are not mere social engagements, so the lex arbitri helps to ensure that the arbitral process works as it should. The
necessity for such support for (and control of) the arbitral process is, of course, reflected in the Model Law, which allows
for certain functions (such as the appointment of arbitrators, where there is a vacancy) and for certain sanctions (such as the
setting aside of an award) to be exercised by the courts of the place of arbitration. 142
3. 99
For this reason, the English courts have held that although, under English law and subject to certain mandatory provisions,
parties are free to agree the law and procedure that will govern how proceedings are conducted, the law chosen must indeed
satisfy this function. In Halpern v Halpern, 143  Jewish law as a religious law was deemed not to be a ‘realistic candidate as
the law of the arbitration’, and in addition was said to lack any supervisory or appellate jurisdiction over arbitrations.
3. 100

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
That different states have different laws governing international arbitration and that some of these laws may not be well suited
to this task has two practical consequences. First, it means that, wherever an international arbitration is held, the provisions
of the local law should be checked to see whether there are any particular mandatory rules that must be observed in order
to obtain a valid award. Secondly, it means that not every country is a suitable situs for international arbitration and that a
certain amount of ‘forum shopping’ is advisable.
3. 101
The first point is almost self-evident. For example, if the local law requires an award to be made within a defined period of
time or to be lodged with a local court for it to be valid, then the necessary action must be taken to conform to this requirement.
The second point is less evident, but equally important. Since the law and practice of international arbitration differs from
one state to the next (and may even differ from place to place within the same state), care should be taken to choose a place
of arbitration in a state that is favourable, rather than in one that is unfavourable. This is a matter of considerable practical
importance and should be considered at the time the parties are drafting their arbitration agreement. 144
3. 102
One final comment is necessary before leaving the discussion of delocalisation and the lex arbitri. It seems, for now, that the
movement in favour of total delocalisation, in the sense of freeing an international arbitration from control by the lex arbitri,
remains aspirational. As the Belgian experiment showed, delocalisation is possible only to the extent that it is permitted by
the lex arbitri, and parties to an arbitration may well prefer an arbitral tribunal that is subject to some rational legal control.
However, there is still discontent amongst practitioners regarding the impact of local laws that are seen to operate unfairly and,
at times, almost arbitrarily, and so there have been cases of what may perhaps be described as ‘delocalisation by a side door’.
3. 103
In Chromalloy, 145  for example, the Egyptian court annulled an arbitral tribunal’s award made in Cairo in favour of a
US corporation. Despite this annulment by the courts of the place of arbitration, the award was granted recognition and
enforcement by the US District Court in Washington, DC—‘to the advantage of the home team’, in the words of certain
distinguished US commentators. 146  And Chromalloy is but one example of national courts enforcing awards that have been
annulled by the courts of the place of arbitration. 147
3. 104
Then there are the problems caused by local courts that issue injunctions at the seat of the arbitration to prevent arbitral
tribunals from carrying out their task. Some tribunals continue with the arbitral proceedings despite the injunction (even when
they are within the territorial jurisdiction of the court concerned) on the basis that the injunction is not justified. 148  In effect,
these arbitrators ‘delocalise’ their arbitration by refusing to accept the rulings of the local court under the lex arbitri. 149
Footnotes
53
A study into corporate attitudes on international arbitration has shown that factors such as ‘formal legal infrastructure’,
including the neutrality and impartiality of its legal system, the national arbitration law, and the place’s record in
enforcing agreements to arbitrate and arbitral awards are key to parties’ choice of the place of arbitration: see White
& Case and Queen Mary School of International Arbitration, University of London, 2018, ‘International Arbitration
Survey: The Evolution of International Arbitration’, available online at http://www.arbitration.qmul.ac.uk/media/
arbitration/docs/2018-International-Arbitration-Survey---The-Evolution-of-International-Arbitration-(2).PDF. See also
dicta by Lord Hoffman in delivering the leading judgment for the House of Lords in West Tankers v RAS (the Front
Comor) [2007] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 391, at [12]: in the case of arbitration, ‘the situs and governing law are generally chosen
by the parties on grounds of neutrality, availability of legal services and the unobtrusive effectiveness of the supervisory
jurisdiction’.
54
Savage and Gaillard (eds) Fouchard, Gaillard, Goldman on International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law
International, 1999), p. 1428. Early recognition of this principle in English law may be seen in Compagnie Tunisienne
de Navigation SA v Compagnie d’Armament Maritime SA [1971] AC 572, at 604.

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
55
For choice of law governing the agreement to arbitrate, see paragraphs 3.18ff; for choice of law governing the contract,
see paragraphs 3.105ff.
56
UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 18.1.
57
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 18.1 (‘The place of the arbitration shall be fixed by the Court, unless agreed upon by the parties.’)
58
The reference was to the second edition of this book.
59
Smith Ltd v H International [1991] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 127, p. 130.
60
Swedish Arbitration Act, s. 6.
61
Swedish Arbitration Act, s. 37.
62
Swedish Arbitration Act, s. 41. It is an unattractive proposition for arbitrators whose work has been accomplished and
whose role is over to face a possible challenge before the local courts in relation to their fees.
63
French Code of Civil Procedure, Bk IV, Title II (‘International arbitration’).
64
See Chapter 1.
65
Australian International Arbitration Act 1974, Div. 2, Art. 16(1).
66
Model Law, Art. 19.
67
See, e.g., Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, Art. 183, which provides that the arbitral tribunal may request the assistance of the court
where a party does not voluntarily comply with a protective measure; the English Arbitration Act, s. 44(1) and (2), which
gives the court the same powers to order the inspection, photocopying, preservation, custody, or detention of property
in relation to an arbitration as it has in relation to litigation; and the Model Law, Art. 9, which allows a party to seek
interim measures of protection from a court. It should be noted that while the courts of the seat play the lead role in
supporting the arbitral process, inter alia, in terms of granting interim relief, it may also be necessary to seek relief from
other courts beyond the seat, where, e.g., assets might be located. Various national laws (e.g., Dutch and German law)
foresee this possibility, and courts in various other jurisdictions including Hong Kong have intervened in support of
arbitrations being conducted overseas: see The Lady Muriel [1995] 2 HKC 320 (CA).
68
British Columbia has adapted the Model Law, in the International Commercial Arbitration Act 1996, s. 27.01, to allow
court-ordered consolidation where the parties to two or more arbitration agreements have agreed to consolidate the
arbitrations arising out of those agreements. The Belgian Judicial Code 2013 (BJC), art. 1709(3) is unusual in that it
provides that where a third party wishes to join proceedings, or is called to join, the arbitral tribunal’s decision to allow
proceedings in respect of this third party requires unanimity of the arbitrators.
69
Shahani, ‘Impact of Sanctions under the CISG’ (2015) 33(4) ASA Bulletin (Kluwer Law International) at 854.
70
See Chapter 1.
71
Swiss PIL, art. 182(1).
72
English Arbitration Act, s. 1(b).
73
For a discussion on guidelines and similarly applicable standards, see paragraphs 249ff.
74
UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 1.3 (‘These Rules shall govern the arbitration except that where any of these Rules is in
conflict with a provision of the law applicable to the arbitration from which the parties cannot derogate, that provision
shall prevail.’)
75
LCIA Rules 2020, Art. 16.5 (‘[ … ] the LCIA Rules shall be interpreted in accordance with the laws of England.’)
76
Scherer, Richman, and Gerbay, Seat and Place of Arbitration in Arbitrating under the 2020 LCIA Rules: A User’s Guide
(Kluwer Law International, 2021), p. 27.
77
See, e.g., Park, ‘The lex loci arbitri and international commercial arbitration’ (1983) 32 ICLQ 21; Jarvin, ‘Le lieu de
l’arbitrage’ (1993) 4 ICC Bulletin 7; Born, International Commercial Arbitration (2nd edn, Kluwer Law International,
2014), pp. 1530–1531. See also Kaufmann-Kohler, ‘Identifying and applying the law governing the arbitral procedure:
The role of the law of the place of arbitration’ (1999) 9 ICCA Congress Series 336.
78
The Geneva Protocol, Art. 2 (emphasis added).
79
Which, by means of Art. VII(2), replaces the Geneva Protocol to the extent that contracting states become bound by
the New York Convention.
80
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(d).
81
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(a) and (e).
82
Model Law, Art. 1(2) (emphasis added). Arts 8 and 9 are concerned with enforcing the arbitration agreement and interim
measures of protection respectively; Arts 35 and 36 are concerned with recognition and enforcement of the award.
83
Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, Art. 176(1) (emphasis added).
84
German Code of Civil Procedure 2005 (as amended in 2021) (German ZPO), bk. 10, s. 1, § 1025(1) (‘The provisions
of this book [on arbitration] shall apply if the place of arbitration within the meaning of § 1043(1) [i.e., the seat of the
arbitration] is Germany.’)

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
85
BJC, Art. 1676(7).
86
Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 (as amended in 2021) (Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act), s. 2(2).
87
Malaysian Arbitration Act 2005 (as amended in 2018), s. 3(3).
88
English Arbitration Act, s. 2.
89
English Arbitration Act, s. 3.
90
English Arbitration Act, s. 52(5).
91
Reymond, ‘Where is an arbitral award made?’ (1992) 108 LQR 1, at 3. There is, however, no such ‘curial’ law in
arbitration proceedings brought pursuant to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). In
accordance with the ICSID Convention, Art. 62, the place of the proceedings is the seat of the Centre unless otherwise
agreed, but this does not impose the curial law of Washington, DC.
92
For the view that at least some hearings and meetings should preferably take place at the seat of the arbitration, see
Paulsson and Petrochilos, UNCITRAL Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2017), pp. 153–154 (‘The better view
is that tribunals should not be too astute in deciding that various acts, such as hearings, should be outside the agreed
seat. That the parties agreed on a seat or [ … ] the tribunal elected one, connotes an assessment or expectation that the
seat has “appropriate” venues’).
93
In the second edition of this book.
94
Union of India v McDonnell Douglas Corporation [1993] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 48. (The Peruvian case referred to in this
citation is generally known as ‘the Peruvian Insurance case’.)
95
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 18.
96
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 26.1.
97
UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 18.2.
98
LCIA Rules 2020, Art. 16.3.
99
Model Law, Art. 20(2). The Netherlands Arbitration Act 2015 (Netherlands Arbitration Act), s. 1037(3), is to like effect;
cf. the law in the United States that requires that hearings be conducted in the place of the arbitration unless the parties
agree otherwise: see, e.g., Spring Hope Rockwool v Industrial Clean Air Inc. 504 F.Supp. 1385 (EDNC 1981); Snyder v
Smith, 736 F.2d 409 (7th Cir. 1984), cert. denied, 469 US 1037 (1984); Jain v de Méré 51 F.3d 686, 692 (7th Cir. 1995);
National Iranian Oil Co. v Ashland Oil, Inc., 817 F.2d 326, 334 (5th Cir. 1987). Under the FAA, where the parties have
not agreed on the location of the arbitration, a court may order the parties to conduct the arbitration in its own district:
Clarendon National Insurance Co. v Lan, 152 F.Supp.2d 506, 524 (SDNY 2001).
100
This was the case in PT Garuda Indonesia v Birgen Air [2002] 1 SLR 393 (CA), in which it was held that there was no
legal nexus between the arbitration and Singapore simply because hearings were held there.
101
See discussion in Paulsson and Petrochilos, UNCITRAL Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2017), p. 154.
102
For example, the local law may not permit arbitrators to take evidence from witnesses on oath.
103
The preceding two paragraphs were cited with approval by the court in Naviera Amazonia Peruana SA v Compania
Internacional de Seguros del Peru [1988] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 116.
104
In ICC Case No. 10623 (2003) 21 ASA Bulletin 60 (including a summary by Professor Crivellaro), the tribunal held
all meetings, etc., in Paris, although the seat of the arbitration was in Ethiopia. The Ethiopian government, a party to
the arbitration, contested the tribunal’s jurisdiction both by challenging it unsuccessfully before the ICC Court and by
applying to its local courts, the interference of which the tribunal ignored. Interference by local courts is further discussed
at paragraph 3.98. See also the decision of the Svea Court of Appeal in Titan Corporation v Alcatel CIT SA (Svea Court
of Appeal), RH 2005:1 (T 1038-05) YCA XXX (2005), 139, in which the Court denied jurisdiction to consider an ex parte
application to set aside an award that stated that the seat of arbitration was Stockholm. The Court based its decision in
part on the fact that all of the hearings (in which one of the authors was counsel for the claimant) had taken place in Paris
and in London, and not in Stockholm; hence, in its view, the arbitration could not be considered to have any connection
to Sweden as required for the Swedish Arbitration Act of 1999 to apply. This decision was subsequently reversed (in
relevant part) by the Swedish Supreme Court.
105
Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v OOO Insurance Company Chubb [2020] UKSC 38, at [68].
106
Another good reason for not labelling the lex arbitri ‘procedural’ is that different countries have different notions of
what is a matter of procedure and what is a matter of substance: cf. the treatment of time limits in English law, discussed
in Chapter 4, paragraph 4.07.
107
Collins (ed.) Dicey, Morris & Collins on the Conflict of Laws (15th edn, Sweet & Maxwell, 2018), paragraphs 16-009,
16-029 (‘In essence, the procedural law of an arbitration deals with two sets of issues: (a) the internal procedure of
the arbitration itself: commencement of the arbitration, appointment of arbitrators, pleadings, provisional measures,
evidence, hearings, and awards; and (b) the external intervention of national courts in the arbitral process’).

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
108
See, e.g., the reference of Lord Diplock to the ‘selection’ of a particular lex arbitri by the choice of a place of arbitration,
in Compagnie Tunisienne de Navigation SA v Compagnie d’Armament Maritime SA [1971] AC 572, at 604.
109
The English Technology and Construction Court, in Braes of Doune Wind Farm (Scotland) v Alfred McAlpine Business
Services [2008] EWHC 426 (TCC), stated that the parties’ designation of ‘Glasgow, Scotland’ as the place of arbitration
referred only to the place where it was intended to hold hearings. England was deemed to be the juridical seat owing to
the fact that the parties had referred to the application of the English Arbitration Act. This case demonstrates that the
parties’ choice of procedural law may be determinative of the seat of the arbitration. According to the court, at [17],
‘one needs to consider what, in substance, the parties agreed was the law of the country which would juridically control
the arbitration’.
110
See Chapter 6.
111
See, e.g., consolidation under Dutch law and the mandatory provisions of other national laws governing arbitration,
such as the mandatory provisions of the English Arbitration Act.
112
Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, Art. 182; there are provisions in Dutch and Italian law to the same effect, and in the French Code
of Civil Procedure, at art. 1509. However, non-compliance with public policy rules would be a ground for setting an
award aside even if another procedural law were chosen.
113
French Code of Civil Procedure, arts 1494–1495.
114
Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, Art. 182(3).
115
In many countries, an arbitrator has no power to issue a subpoena and the parties must rely upon the relevant court
for such process: see, e.g., Model Law, Art. 27. The United States does allow for an arbitrator to summon a witness to
attend and to bring any material documents or evidence, but the local federal district court must be called in to assist in
compelling a reluctant witness to attend or to punish a witness who fails to attend: FAA, s. 7. See also Chapter 7.
116
Naviera Amazonia Peruana SA v Compania Internacional de Seguros de Peru [1988] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 116.
117
Ibid., at 120. See also Union of India v McDonnell Douglas Corp. [1993] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 48, 50 (QB). In that case, the
parties’ agreement was to be conducted in accordance with the procedure provided in the Indian Arbitration Act of 1940,
while the seat of the arbitration proceedings was to be London. The High Court interpreted the arbitration agreement
as requiring the arbitration procedure to accord with Indian law, while the English courts would have jurisdiction to
supervise the arbitration. The court acknowledged the ‘at least theoretical possibility that the parties are free to choose to
hold their arbitration in one country but subject to the procedural laws of another’ notwithstanding that this arrangement
was ‘calculated to give rise to great difficulties and complexities’.
118
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(e); Model Law, Art. 36(1)(a)(v). Note that these provisions are discretionary:
recognition and enforcement may be refused. See also Chapter 10.
120
Model Law, Art. 31(3).
121
Netherlands Arbitration Act, Art. 1037(2).
122
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 32.3.
123
UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 18.1.
124
See discussion in Paulsson and Petrochilos, UNCITRAL Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2017), pp. 151–152.
125
Mann, ‘Where is an award “made”?’ (1985) 1 Arb Intl 107, at 108. See also Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v OOO Insurance
Company Chubb [2020] UKSC 38, at [68] (‘A choice of place as the seat does not dictate that hearings must be held,
or that any award must actually be issued, in that place’). An alternative view is that an award is ‘made’ at the place
where it is signed—a view that may still prevail in some jurisdictions. The question is important and is discussed in
more detail in Chapter 9.
126
For example, Egypt has adopted the Model Law, but has added a provision that provides for annulment if the award
fails to apply the law agreed by the parties—thus opening the way for the Egyptian courts to review awards on issues
of law, which is not permitted under the Model Law. For an authoritative commentary on Egypt’s arbitration law, see
Atallah, ‘The 1994 Egyptian Arbitration Law ten years on’ (2003) 14 ICC Bulletin 16. In Latin America, while several
states have now adopted the Model Law with limited modifications (Bolivia, Chile, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Paraguay,
Peru, and Venezuela), Brazil and Costa Rica chose to tinker with the Model Law’s formulation and have added their
own customised elements.
127
This was the view of the Mustill Committee, which recommended that the Model Law should not be adopted, but that
the English law of arbitration should nevertheless take careful account of it—as has been done, in the English Arbitration
Act.
128
See, e.g., Mustill and Boyd, ‘A survey of the 1996 Act’, in Commercial Arbitration (2nd edn with 2001 Companion
Volume, LexisNexis Butterworths, 2001), pp. 28–30, commenting on the English Arbitration Act. See also Mustill
and Boyd, Commercial Arbitration (2nd edn with 2001 Companion Volume, LexisNexis Butterworths, 2001), Preface,
where it is said that:

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
The Act has however given English arbitration law an entirely new face, a new policy, and new
foundations. The English judicial authorities [ … ] have been replaced by the statute as the principal source
of law. The influence of foreign and international methods and concepts is apparent in the text and structure
of the Act, and has been openly acknowledged as such. Finally, the Act embodies a new balancing of the
relationships between parties, advocates, arbitrators and courts which is not only designed to achieve a
policy proclaimed within Parliament and outside, but may also have changed their juristic nature.
129
See in particular Lew, ‘Achieving the dream: Autonomous arbitration’ (2006) 22 Arb Intl 178, at 202; Fouchard,
L’Arbitrage Commercial International (Litec, 1965), pp. 22–27; Paulsson, ‘Arbitration unbound: Award detached from
the law of its country of origin’ (1981) 30 ICLQ 358; Paulsson, ‘Delocalisation of international commercial arbitration:
When and why it matters’ (1983) 32 ICLQ 53. For a continuation of the debate, see Nakamura, ‘The place of arbitration:
Its fictitious nature and lex arbitri’ (2000) 15 Mealey’s Intl Arb Rep 23; Rubins, ‘The arbitral seat is no fiction: A brief
reply to Tatsuya Nakamura’s Commentary, “The place of arbitration: Its fictitious nature and lex arbitri”’ (2001) 16
Mealey’s Intl Arb Rep 23; Pinsolle, ‘Parties to an international arbitration with the seat in France are at full liberty
to organise the procedure as they see fit: A reply to the article by Noah Rubins’ (2001) 16 Mealey’s Intl Arb Rep 30;
Nakamura, ‘The fictitious nature of the place of arbitration may not be denied’ (2001) 16 Mealey’s Intl Arb Rep 22.
130
Authors’ translation, emphasis added. See Société PT Putrabali Adyamulia v Société Rena Holding et Société Mnugotia
Est Epices [2007] Rev Arb 507, p. 514 (‘[L]a sentence internationale, qui n’est rattachée à aucun ordre juridique étatique,
est une décision de justice internationale dont la régularité est examinée au regard des règles applicables dans le pays
où sa reconnaissance et son exécution sont demandées [ … ]’).
131
Dallah Real Estate and Tourism Holding Co. v Ministry of Religious Affairs, Government of Pakistan [2010] UKSC
4, at [15].
132
In this discussion, ‘delocalisation’ is used (as it was originally) to signify the detachment of international arbitration from
control by the law of the place of arbitration. Somewhat confusingly, the term is now sometimes used to indicate not
only detachment from the lex arbitri, but also the replacement of a national law governing the substance of the dispute
by general principles or some other non-national concept: see, e.g., Toope, Mixed International Arbitration (Grotius,
1990), p. 19, who states: ‘Some [specialists] would preclude the delocalisation of procedure, but allow delocalisation of
the substantive law, through the application of “general principles”, “a lex mercatoria” or international law per se.’
133
Dell Computer Corp v Union des consommateurs 2007 SCC 34, (2007) 284 DLR (4th) 577, at 51.
134
See Fouchard, L’Arbitrage Commercial International (Litec, 1965), pp. 22–27.
135
The point is no doubt so obvious as to need no comment, but the statement of Professor Weil seems particularly apt in
this context: ‘The principle of pacta sunt servanda and that of party autonomy do not float in space; a system of law
is necessary to give them legal force and effect.’ See Weil, ‘Problèmes relatifs aux contrats passés entre un état et un
particulier’ (1969) 128 Hague Recueil 95, at 181 (authors’ translation).
136
By its law of 27 March 1985, a provision was added to the BJC, Art. 1717 to the effect that a losing party was not
permitted to challenge in the Belgian courts an award made in an international arbitration held in Belgium, unless at
least one of the parties had a place of business or other connection with Belgium. In the event, however, it appears that
this legal provision discouraged parties from choosing Belgium as the seat of the arbitration and the law has since been
changed. Belgian law now allows parties to an international arbitration to opt out of local control if they so wish, but
no longer provides for compulsory delocalisations. See, BJC, Art. 1676(7) (‘Part 6 of this Code [i.e., on arbitration]
shall apply and the Belgian courts shall have jurisdiction when the place of arbitration as defined in article 1701, § 1
is located in Belgium or when the parties have so agreed.’).
137
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(a) and (e).
138
Model Law, Art. 36(1)(a)(i) and (v).
139
Gaillard, Legal Theory of International Arbitration (Martinus Nijhoff, 2010), p. 35.
140
Paulsson, The Idea of Arbitration (Oxford University Press, 2013), p. 44.
141
Bank Mellat v Helliniki Techniki SA [1984] QB 291, p. 301.
142
See Model Law, Arts 6 (which allocates various functions to the local courts) and 34 (which allows the local court to
set aside awards made in its territory, on certain limited grounds).
143
Halpern v Halpern [2006] EWHC 603 (Comm); affirmed on this point in Halpern v Halpern [2007] EWCA Civ 291.
144
See Chapter 2.
145
Chromalloy Aeroservices Inc. v Arab Republic of Egypt, 939 F.Supp. 907 (DDC 1996), (2003) 19 Arab Intl 424, (2003)
12 Intl Arab Rep 8.
146
Brower, Brower, II and Sharpe, ‘The coming crisis in the global adjudication system’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 415, at 424.

Section C. - Law Governing the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638618 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
18
147
See, e.g., Corporacion Mexicana de Mantenimiento Integral, S. de R.L. de C.V. v PEMEX- Exploracion y Produccion,
No. 10 Civ 206 (AKH) 2013 WL 4517225 (SDNY, 27 August 2013), in which the district court in the Southern District of
New York confirmed a US$400 million arbitral award that had been set aside in the seat in Mexico City. Such examples
are considered in greater detail in Chapter 11.
148
See, e.g., Himpurna California Energy Ltd v Republic of Indonesia (2000) XXV YBCA 11, at 176, in which the tribunal,
in its interim award dated 26 September 1999, ruled that an injunction (ordered by the Central District Court of Jakarta
that arbitral proceedings be suspended) was ‘the consequence of the refusal of the Republic of Indonesia to submit to
an arbitration to which it [had] previously consented [and] therefore [it did] not, under Art. 28 of the UNCITRAL Rules
[on the submission of evidence], excuse the Republic of Indonesia’s default’. See also ICC Case No. 10623 (2003) 21
ASA Bulletin 60.
149
This is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7, especially at paragraphs 7.56–7.62.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
