Determining the language(s) for a specific ICC arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406906...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Determining the language(s) for a specific ICC arbitration
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Determining the language(s) for a specific ICC arbitration
20-8
The issue of the language to be used in the proceedings arises initially for both parties in their relation with the Secretariat of
the ICC Court, particularly when filing the Request and the Answer. However, art.20 leaves it to the Tribunal to decide on the
language to the extent that there is no agreement between the parties. Therefore, until the Tribunal has been constituted and
decided the issue, it may not be clear which language or languages will be applicable in the proceedings. Once the Tribunal has
been constituted, it will seek to establish the language of the arbitration as soon as possible and in any event at or shortly after
the case management conference. If the language of the arbitration has not been determined when the Terms of Reference are
being prepared, the Tribunal may either expressly reserve the issue or draft the Terms of Reference in both languages.
20-9
In respect of the parties’ relations with the Tribunal, the language question becomes relevant when the parties: (i) engage their
counsel; (ii) select an arbitrator; (iii) make their written submissions; (iv) submit documentary evidence; (v) have witnesses
testify; and (vi) make oral arguments. As far as the members of the Tribunal are concerned, the language question arises not
only in respect of the submissions of the parties, but also with regard to drafting the Terms of Reference and procedural orders,
conducting the hearing, the internal deliberations and the rendering of the award.
20-10
Once an award is rendered, the language question may also play a role when a party seeks the annulment of the award at the
place of arbitration, and/or its enforcement in the respondent’s country or elsewhere whenever the language of the arbitration is
not identical to the language in the civil courts of the concerned country. In such a case, it is usually necessary to have a sworn
translation prepared for submission to the national court.
20-11
Article 20 provides that there may be one or more languages in the arbitration. Many arbitration clauses contain an express
agreement as to the language or languages to be used in arbitration. Since the basic principle of arbitration is party autonomy,
the parties’ agreement will normally prevail. The issue of whether there is an agreement between the parties as to the language
is a question of interpretation of the arbitration agreement. Otherwise, the language of the arbitration is a question of procedure,
not of substance so that the procedural rules governing the arbitration need to be examined. As noted under art.19, 87  in an
ICC arbitration, the ICC Rules will govern the arbitration procedure, except where they may conflict with a mandatory rule
of law of the place of arbitration.
20-12
As regards mandatory legal principles, none of the major centres of arbitration requires the parties to use a particular language
with respect to an arbitration or a part of an arbitration. They place no restriction on the parties’ agreement as to the language
of an arbitration. This principle is also set out in art.22 of the UNCITRAL Model Law. There is a diminishing list of countries
in which there is either a requirement or a presumption that the local language will be used for international arbitrations. 88
20-13
In some instances where the arbitration clause is silent as to the language of arbitration, the parties may nevertheless maintain
that there was an agreement as to the language to be used in the arbitration. 89  The question in each instance is to be determined
under the law governing the arbitration agreement which relates to the interpretation of contracts (and the language provision

Determining the language(s) for a specific ICC arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406906...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
in the contract where it would be separate from the arbitration agreement). Usually, the standard will be the objective intent of
the parties as regards the language of the arbitration.
20-14
The claimant will file the Request in a specific language and will often set out an initial argument as to the language of the
arbitration if there is no express agreement in accordance with art.4(3)(h). However, there may be an issue as to whether a
Request filed in a particular language gave sufficient notice of the arbitration. In one recent US case a notice of arbitration filed
in Chinese was held to not have given the respondent sufficient notice of the arbitration. 90
20-15
The respondent then has the choice of either accepting the language proposed by the claimant or of arguing that another language
should be applicable in accordance with art.5(1)(f). If the respondent maintains that another language should be applicable, it
may well choose to file the Answer in that language. It may even decide to file no Answer on the ground that the Request was
not submitted in the language agreed by the parties. If the arbitration clause contains a clear provision as to the language of
arbitration, and the claimant chooses to file the Request in a language other than the one of the arbitration clause, it runs the risk
that the respondent will refuse to submit an Answer, as long as no translation of the Request into the language of arbitration is
provided, and/or as long as the Tribunal has not ordered the respondent to file an Answer.
Footnotes
87
See the discussion under art.19 at paras 19-1 to 19-2.
88
See for example art.29 of Law No.27 for 1994 of Egypt (presumption of use of Arabic unless agreement between the
parties or decision to the contrary by the Tribunal). See also art.212(6) of the Procedural Civil Law of the UAE of 8
March 1992. For a general analysis, see Lamèthe “Les langues de l’arbitrage international: liberté raisonnée de choix
ou contraintes réglementées?—D’autres intérêts économiques sont en jeu: ils sont culturels, moraux et sociaux et ils
doivent être préservés. C’est au juriste de dire comment (Philippe Fouchard)” (2007) JDI No.4, p.1174.
89
For example, a language provision in the contract concerning the contract as a whole may lead a party to argue that it
should also apply to the arbitration.
90
CEEG (Shanghai) Solar Science and Technology v Lumos LLC, 829F30/1201 (10th Cir 2016).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
