Time limit for Issuing the Order, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406989 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Time limit for Issuing the Order
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Time limit for Issuing the Order
29-78
Pursuant to art.6(4) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules, the Order is to be issued at the latest within 15 days after receipt of the
file by the Emergency Arbitrator. In practice, this period was respected in most cases. 595
29-79
This time limit can be extended by the President of the ICC Court pursuant to art.6(4) Emergency Arbitrator Rules. In doing
so, the President will consider the Procedural Timetable established by the Emergency Arbitrator in the first place.
29-80
As long as the time limit for issuing the Order runs, with or without extension, the Emergency Arbitrator remains empowered
to render the Order even if the Tribunal has in the meantime received the file from the Secretariat, art.2(2) of the Emergency
Arbitrator Rules.
Footnotes
595
Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration (“135. Article 6(4) of Appendix V provides that the Order shall be
rendered within 15 days from the date the file is transmitted to the EA. The same Article 6(4) provides that this time
limit can be extended by the President of the ICC Court either at the request of the EA or on the president’s motion.
In ten of the first 80 ICC EA Applications, no Order was rendered due to withdrawal or non-applicability of the ICC
EA Rules. Out of the 70 remaining cases:
 
-In 33 cases, the 15-day deadline was complied with. The Order was made in less than 15 days in three cases.
 
-In 32 cases, the Order was rendered between day 16 and day 19.
 
-In 5 cases, the Order was rendered more than 19 days after the file was transmitted to the EA, in each case after
an extension was approved by the President. In one case (the longest case by far), the total time elapsed between
the transmission of the file to the EA and the Order was 30 days. These delays can primarily be attributed to
parties agreeing on an extensive hearing schedule affecting the procedural timetables, or a request for temporary
suspension of a scheduled hearing resulting from an initial non-compliance of a respondent with a preliminary
Order to maintain the status quo such as the calling of a letter of credit. Based on these statistics, it can be concluded
that the ICC EA proceedings are almost invariably concluded within or very shortly after the very challenging 15-
day deadline foreseen in the ICC Rules.”)
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
