Article 23(3): Refusal of a party to sign the Terms of..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 23(3): Refusal of a party to sign the Terms of Reference;
Approval by the ICC Court
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 23(3): Refusal of a party to sign the Terms of Reference; Approval by the ICC Court
“If any of the parties refuses to take part in the drawing up of the Terms of Reference or to sign the same, they shall be
submitted to the Court for approval. When the Terms of Reference have been signed in accordance with Article 23(2) or
approved by the Court, the arbitration shall proceed.”
23-74
Article 23(3) is intended to prevent one of the parties from blocking the Terms of Reference and the arbitration by refusing to
sign them. Parties may refuse to sign the Terms of Reference because they intend to default on the entire procedure. Parties may
also refuse to sign the Terms of Reference to avoid appearing to accept the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, although with properly
drafted Terms of Reference this should not be an issue. Finally, parties, such as state entities, may argue that they are unable
to obtain the required authorisations to sign the document.
23-75
With regard to jurisdictional objections, a party should ensure that the party not only records its objection as to jurisdiction, but
also that it outlines in detail in its claims the reasons why it maintains that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction. Provided that the
party does so, there is no reason for the party not to sign the Terms of Reference due to its jurisdictional objections.
23-76
As mentioned in para.23-72, the Secretariat will review the draft Terms of Reference to ensure that the draft complies with
the requirements of the ICC Rules. This review is particularly important where a party is not participating in the procedure or
is participating but has indicated that it has reservations about signing the Terms of Reference. After the Terms of Reference
have been signed by the Tribunal and at least one party is willing to sign (usually the claimant), the ICC Court will review the
Terms of Reference submitted by the Tribunal to determine whether they meet the requirements of the Rules and, if a party
has objected to particular provisions, whether the party’s objection is justified. It may be, for example, that the drafting was
inappropriate and that the party’s refusal to sign was justified. In such a case the ICC Court would be expected to return the
Terms of Reference to the Tribunal for modification. If the Tribunal has any questions as to the draft Terms of Reference where
a party is refusing to sign them, the president may wish to go over the issues with the Secretariat to determine whether there
is an issue based on the ICC Court’s practice.
23-77
If the non-signing party objects to the approval of the Terms of Reference, it has no recourse against that decision under the ICC
Rules. However, if the ICC Court approves the Terms of Reference over the objection of a party, then the Terms of Reference
will meet the requirements of the Rules.
23-78
Article 23(3) states that the arbitration shall proceed upon signature of the Terms of Reference or upon approval by the ICC
Court of the Terms of Reference. However, in some instances, the Tribunal will take steps with respect to the procedure under
art.19 prior to the signing of the Terms of Reference. 319

Article 23(3): Refusal of a party to sign the Terms of..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
23-79
As stated above, the signing or approval of the Terms of Reference is the starting point for the initial six-month period for the
Tribunal to submit an award in accordance with art.31(1).
23-80
Sometimes, certain obligations are added to the Terms of Reference, such as an express agreement as to confidentiality. If one
party signs the Terms of Reference, but not the other, two issues arise. The first issue is whether the ICC Court’s approval of
the Terms of Reference binds the non-signatory. The answer has two aspects:
 
(i)As far as obligations or undertakings which are added to the Terms of Reference which go beyond the Rules and the
arbitration agreement, the ICC Court’s approval of the Terms of Reference will not extend new obligations upon the non-
signatory.
 
(ii)Insofar as by approving the Terms of Reference a procedural requirement for rendering the award will be deemed to
have occurred and will allow the arbitration to move forward, then the Terms of Reference as approved by the ICC Court
have a binding effect. Moreover, by accepting the ICC Rules the parties are agreeing that the Terms of Reference may be
established in accordance with art.23(3).
23-81
A second issue is whether the party that signed the Terms of Reference is bound by a duty included in the Terms of Reference,
when the opposing party will not be bound by the same duty by virtue of its refusal to sign the Terms of Reference. The issue
does not arise if the Tribunal limits the Terms of Reference to the requirements of the Rules. If that is not the case, and there is
no provision conditioning a party’s obligations on acceptance by the other party, then the signatory may well have an argument
that there is a lack of mutuality in the obligations if the other party has refused to sign the Terms of Reference. However, the
effect on the signatory will depend on the law governing the arbitration agreement and/or the lex arbitri.
Footnotes
319
For example, if one or both parties are seeking to accelerate the arbitration, the Tribunal may indicate when it expects
to receive submissions or even issue a procedural order to that effect. In effect, the time for the preparation of the
submission will run prior to the signing of the Terms of Reference.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
