Section F. - Specific Issues, Other Applicable Rules, and..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section F. - Specific Issues, Other Applicable Rules, and
Guidelines
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 3 - Applicable Laws
Section F. - Specific Issues, Other Applicable Rules, and Guidelines
(a) Legal privilege
3. 249
Issues relating to legal privilege arise most commonly, though not exclusively, in international arbitration in the context of
document production, where parties invoke attorney–client privilege or legal privilege as a defence to document production
requests. In the context of document production or otherwise, parties are free to agree on the law applicable to legal privilege
in their dispute. 346  But in the absence of such a choice, and where there is a dispute as to the proper invocation of legal
privilege, it falls to a tribunal to determine the applicable law. In this scenario, tribunals are, more commonly than not, faced
with the fact that institutional rules do not provide an answer. 347  Nor do national laws treat the matter uniformly: privilege is,
in some jurisdictions, considered a substantive issue (the position adopted in many common law countries), while in others it
is a procedural matter (particularly in civil law countries), and tends to be addressed as part of domestic litigation procedure
rather than as a specific aspect of international arbitration. 348  If the law of the seat and the law of the contract differ, which
law should the tribunal apply?
3. 250
The uncertainty resulting from the lack of clarity on this issue can have significant practical repercussions. As one commentator
has noted: ‘in a dispute involving the United States, France, Iran, and China, each and every party (and their lawyers)—where
documents, transactions, and communications transcend borders—it is not necessarily clear which national (or international)
norms govern privilege and confidentiality’. 349  Thus, a party may enter into an arbitration assuming that certain in-house
communications with another in-house colleague located in another country are protected from privilege, only to learn that,
depending on the law governing privilege, those conversations may be discoverable and put into evidence in an arbitration. 350
3. 251
In the absence of explicit or implied choice of law, tribunals may employ a closest connection test, looking at the law that
has the closest connection to the relevant attorney–client relationship, such as the law of the country where the attorney–client
relationship took place. 351
3. 252
This approach resembles that taken by some courts. 352  Such an approach could, however, result in different legal privileges
applying to different parties. This has led some tribunals to apply a ‘most-favoured privilege’ rule approach, in which the
tribunal adopts the law that grants the parties the highest standard of protection. 353  Given their wide discretion as to which law
to apply to the question of privilege, some tribunals have adopted a cumulative approach, applying all laws that might have a
close connection to the arbitration and searching for commonalities between them. 354  Other tribunals have adopted their own,
autonomous standard. 355
3. 253
The IBA set out sensible guidelines for counsel and tribunals concerned with issues of legal professional privilege, in its Rules
on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration (the IBA Rules). The Rules state that at the request of a party or on its own
initiative, an arbitral tribunal may exclude from evidence or production any document, statement, or oral testimony where there

Section F. - Specific Issues, Other Applicable Rules, and..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
is ‘legal impediment or privilege under the legal or ethical rules determined by the Arbitral Tribunal to be applicable’. 356  The
matters that the tribunal is to take into account in considering pleas of legal privilege include (i) the protection of confidentiality,
for the purposes of providing or obtaining legal advice; (ii) the protection of confidentiality for the purposes of settlement
negotiations; (iii) ‘the expectations of the Parties and their advisors at the time the legal impediment or privilege is said to have
arisen’; (iv) possible waiver of privilege by consent, earlier disclosure, use of the relevant information, or otherwise; and (v) the
need to maintain fairness and equality between the parties, ‘particularly if they are subject to different legal or ethical rules’. 357
3. 254
The IBA Rules, as we have said previously, form part of the ‘soft law’ of international arbitration, but it is increasingly common
for experienced counsel and arbitrators to adopt them as part of the procedural rules for arbitrations in which they are engaged.
Often, however, rather than make the arbitration subject to another set of rules that have to be obeyed, they will be adopted
as guidelines. This avoids the risk of any conflict with other rules to which the arbitration may be subject, such as those of
an arbitral institution.
(b) Ethical rules
3. 255
Much has been said and written about the duties to which arbitrators are subject. 358  But what of arbitration practitioners who
appear as counsel in international arbitrations, often outside their home jurisdictions? A lawyer appearing in a court action
before his or her own local courts will clearly be subject to the rules of professional ethics of his or her local bar. But what
if that lawyer practises outside his or her home jurisdiction? And what if he or she is appearing in an arbitration? And what
if that arbitration is taking place in yet another different jurisdiction? Will the lawyer remain subject to his or her local bar
rules? Will he or she also be subject to the ethical rules applying to lawyers practising in the jurisdiction in which he or she is
now based? Will the lawyer also be subject to the ethical rules applying to lawyers conducting legal proceedings in the place
of arbitration, if different?
3. 256
The answers to these myriad questions can have a significant impact on the conduct of the arbitration. Let us consider, for
example, the question of how much contact a lawyer should have with a witness prior to a hearing. In some jurisdictions, such as
England, it is not permissible for a lawyer to ‘coach’ a witness on the evidence to be given at a hearing. 359  In others, constraints
on lawyers appear to be far more limited. In her comparison of standards of professional conduct, one commentator put it
thus: ‘An Australian lawyer felt that from his perspective it would be unethical to prepare a witness; a Canadian lawyer said
it would be illegal; and an American lawyer’s view was that not to prepare a witness would be malpractice.’ 360  Therein lies
the problem: counsel in the same procedure, playing to very different rules, with a possible concrete impact on the substantive
outcome of the arbitration.
3. 257
Until recently, there had been little alternative for counsel other than to ascertain individually the answers to the following
questions.
 
i.‘Am I subject to my professional bar rules when I am acting in an arbitration, and even when I am acting in an arbitration
abroad?’ 361
 
ii.‘If I am practising abroad, am I also subject to the professional ethical rules of the jurisdiction in which I am
practising?’ 362
 
iii.‘If the seat of the arbitration is in a third jurisdiction, am I also subject to the ethical rules of a third bar?’
3. 258
It is a matter of concern that the answers to these questions may not be the same for all counsel participating in the same
arbitration proceedings. Commentators have for some time questioned whether professional bar rules might be harmonised to
apply to practitioners in international arbitration. 363  The idea is attractive, particularly for those concerned to ensure that the

Section F. - Specific Issues, Other Applicable Rules, and..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
playing field for the participants in international arbitration is level. However, the changes necessary to achieve this should
not be underestimated. National bar rules around the world would have to make express exceptions to their general codes for
international practitioners. 364  It seems certain that such changes are unlikely to happen quickly, if at all.
3. 259
An alternative means of harmonisation lies in non-binding guidelines. Again, the IBA has taken a lead on this, publishing its
Guidelines on Party Representation in International Arbitration in May 2013. The Guidelines, which are intended to provide
practical assistance in dealing with ethical issues that arise in international arbitration, provide useful guidance in relation to
some of the most frequent issues encountered by practitioners.
3. 260
The Guidelines address five ethical issues that arise in practice, relating to:
 
i.conflicts of interest (Guidelines 5 and 6);
 
ii.ex parte communications with arbitrators (Guidelines 7 and 8);
 
iii.misleading submissions to the arbitral tribunal (Guidelines 9–11);
 
iv.improper information exchange and disclosure (Guidelines 12–17); and
 
v.assistance to witnesses and experts (Guidelines 19–24).
In relation to each, the Guidelines set out best practices and recommended approaches. They also propose certain remedies and
sanctions, including admonishing the representative, drawing adverse inferences, and altering the apportionment of costs, as
well as a broader reference to any ‘other measures’ that might ensure the fairness and integrity of proceedings.
3. 261
The leading international arbitral institutions have also taken their first cautious steps towards regulating the conduct of counsel
(and parties) in international arbitration.
The ICC, for instance, envisages that an arbitral tribunal may sanction unreasonable conduct in making its award of costs. The
ICC Rules provide that, in making a decision on costs, the tribunal shall take account of ‘such circumstance as it considers
relevant, including the extent to which each party has conducted the arbitration in an expeditious and cost-effective manner’. 365
3. 262
More boldly, the LCIA Rules set out certain provisions governing a party’s legal representatives. These include a provision that
each party ‘shall ensure that all its authorised representatives appearing by name before the Arbitral Tribunal have agreed to
comply with the general guidelines contained in the Annex to the LCIA Rules, as a condition of such representation’. 366  The
general guidelines in the Annex are designed to promote ‘the good and equal conduct of the parties’ authorised representatives
of the parties appearing by name within the arbitration’, and they provide, for example, that a legal representative should not
knowingly make any false statement to the arbitral tribunal, should not conceal or assist in the concealment of any document
of which production is ordered, and should not initiate any undisclosed contact with an arbitrator. The LCIA Rules also give an
arbitral tribunal the power to order sanctions for the violation of the guidelines, including (broadly) the taking of any measure
‘necessary to fulfill within the arbitration the general duties required of the Arbitral Tribunal’, as defined elsewhere in the
Rules. 367
(c) Guidelines
3. 263
Every international arbitration—at least in theory—is a microcosm of potential procedural reform. That potentiality is
undoubtedly a quality of the arbitral process, but that quality has a price: procedural unpredictability. And it is a price that many
in the expanding constituency of arbitration users are increasingly unwilling to pay. To address this unpredictability, in recent

Section F. - Specific Issues, Other Applicable Rules, and..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
years there has been a steady growth in procedural guidelines and recommendations, which now occupy a prominent place in
the practice of international arbitration.
3. 264
These many rules and guidelines constitute the so-called ‘soft law’ of international arbitration. They do not seek to alter any
local rules and regulations in relation to the conduct of party representatives, nor do they imbue arbitral tribunals with any of
the powers held by national courts, professional societies, or other authorities to enforce such rules and regulations. Instead,
they are intended by the parties and by the arbitral tribunal as a useful guide in the conduct of an international arbitration. Many
of them feature prominently—side-by-side with the applicable laws—in the conduct of international arbitrations. That is why
they are referred to, where appropriate, throughout this book.
Footnotes
346
This may be ex ante or ex post.
347
For example, none of the ICC, LCIA, nor UNCITRAL Rules provide any guidance in this respect. One exception is the
ICDR Rules 2021, which provide in Art. 25 that the arbitral tribunal should (to the extent possible) give ‘preference to
the rule that provides the highest level of protection’.
348
See discussion in Mockesch, Attorney-Client Privilege in International Arbitration (Oxford University Press, 2016), at
paragraphs 8.16–8.17. See also paragraph 8.28 (‘There appears to be no national arbitration legislation which expressly
mentions the issue of privilege’).
349
Franck, ‘International arbitration and attorney–client privilege: Conflict of laws approach’ (2019) 51(3) Arizona State
Law Journal 938.
350
Ibid., at 938–939.
351
If the client and the attorney live in different countries, this law can be either the client’s place of business or the attorney’s
domicile. See Catelli and Brueggemann, ‘Evidentiary objections’, in Klaesner, Magal, and Neuhaus (eds) The Guide to
Evidence in International Arbitration (Global Arbitration Review, 2021), p. 96.
352
See, e.g., Wellin v Wellin, 211 F Supp 3d 793 (DSC 2016), where the US District Court of South Carolina used conflicts
principles to determine which US state jurisdiction had the ‘most significant relationship’ with the legal privilege in
question.
353
See, e.g., Blanco v United Mexican States, ICISD Case No. UNCT/17/1, Procedural Order No. 5 at [17], [19] (the
tribunal was ‘concerned that applying different standards on the matters of privilege could affect the balance and equality
of treatment of the Parties’). For an in-depth analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of each approach, see Stouten
and Jansen, ‘Legal privilege issues: At the mercy of the arbitral tribunal’, 3 June 2021, International Bar Association,
available online at https://www.ibanet.org/legal-privilege-arbitral-tribunal.
354
See, e.g., ICC Case No. 13054, (2014) 25 ICC ICArb Bull Suppl 14.
355
See, e.g., Bank for International Settlements: Procedural Order No 6 (Order with Respect to the Discovery of Certain
Documents for Which Attorney-Client Privilege Has Been Claimed), 11 June 2002, Recueil des Sentences Arbitrales,
Vol. XXIII, pp. 169–182 (in which the tribunal defined the scope of legal privilege without reference to any national law).
356
IBA Rules, Art. 9.2.
357
IBA Rules, Art. 9.4.
358
Indeed, this is discussed in Chapter 5.
359
Bar Council of England and Wales Code of Conduct, Pt. VII, s. 705(a). See, e.g., R v Momdou and anor [2005] EWCA
Crim 177 at [45] (‘There is no place for witness training in this country, we do not do it. It is unlawful’).
360
Miller, ‘Zip to nil? A comparison of American and English lawyers’ standards of professional conduct’ (1995) CA 32
ALI-ABA 199, at 204.
361
van Houtte, ‘Counsel–witness relations and professional misconduct in civil law systems’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 457.
Professor van Houtte argues that Art. 4 (‘Applicable Rules of Conduct in Court’) of the Code of Conduct for European
Lawyers has the effect that whenever the seat of the arbitration is within the EU, the ethical standards of the seat apply.
For standards that should apply to participants in the arbitral process, see Veeder, ‘The 2001 Goff Lecture: The lawyer’s
duty to arbitrate in good faith’ (2002) 18 Arb Intl 431.
362
In many jurisdictions, it is a requirement for foreign lawyers practising in the jurisdiction to register with the local bar.

Section F. - Specific Issues, Other Applicable Rules, and..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
363
Paulsson, ‘Standards of conduct for counsel in international arbitration’ (1992) 3 Am Rev Intl Arb 214. In a similar vein,
the Code of Conduct for European Lawyers was originally drawn up and adopted in 1998 by the Conseil des Barreaux
de la Communauté Européene (CCBE).
364
The Brussels Bar Rules contain such express exceptions. For a further discussion of the issue, see van Houtte, ‘Counsel–
witness relations and professional misconduct in civil law systems’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 457.
365
ICC Rules 2021, Art. 38.5.
366
LCIA Rules 2020, Art. 18.5.
367
LCIA Rules 2020, Art. 18.6.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
