“at the request of a party”, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407070 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
“at the request of a party”
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
“at the request of a party”
28-16
A Tribunal is not entitled to issue conservatory or interim measures on its own initiative. A party must make an application
for interim or conservatory measures. Once a party has made an application for such a measure, the Tribunal may issue such
a measure that it deems appropriate. A Tribunal is therefore not limited to the exact measure requested by the party. However,
the measure issued by the Tribunal must be based on the application made by a party, and both parties should be provided with
a reasonable opportunity to be heard on the measure that the Tribunal adopts.
28-17
An interim or conservatory measure involves a direction by a Tribunal issued at the request of a party against a party to do or
not to do a certain thing. The Tribunal does not have the power under art.28 to issue orders for or against non-parties, although
it can of course order a party to exercise its rights with respect to a third party to carry out a measure. In ICC Case No.16918
(unpublished) a party sought interim and conservatory relief with respect to mining installations in an African state. The Tribunal
excluded from the scope of relief the installations that were not the property of the party requesting them (although the party
had financed the installations) on the basis that the owner of the installations was not a party to the arbitration. However, the
Tribunal did grant the order to preclude transfer of the mining permit from the named party to the arbitration and against the
enforcement against the party of a judgment issued in the country. 472
28-18
Once issued as a procedural order, the Tribunal has the right to modify any conservatory or interim measures that it has issued.
If issued as an award, the right of the Tribunal to modify the interim measures will depend on the terms of the partial award. For
example, the Tribunal may decide in the award that a conservatory or interim measure is applicable until a certain date or until
revoked by the Tribunal, in which case the Tribunal is entitled to modify the measure within the limits set out in the award.
Footnotes
472
See the report in http://s1.q4cdn.com/857957299/files/doc_news/2010-08-21_NR.pdf [accessed 23 March 2018,
subscription required] (one of the authors was counsel in the case). See also final award in ICC Case No.14287 (June
2008) (Extract), Part IV.11 para.3 in Special Supplement 2011: Interim, Conservatory and Emergency Measures in ICC
Arbitration, 74.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
