Section A. - Global Dispute Resolution, UKBC-REDFERN 530638603 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section A. - Global Dispute Resolution
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Section A. - Global Dispute Resolution
1. 01
If international arbitration did not exist, it would be necessary to invent it. As investment, trade, and commerce continue to
expand worldwide, agreements that cross national frontiers are a vital part of business and commercial life. Inevitably some
of these transnational transactions and investments, whether they involve states, corporations, or individuals, will give rise to
disputes. The most immediate solution is for the disputants to try to settle their differences by negotiation. No sensible business
person, corporation, or state wants to spend time and money on legal proceedings if this can be avoided. Yet if the dispute
cannot be settled, it is important that there should be a fair, reliable, and peaceful method of resolving it and enforcing the result,
according to the provisions of the parties’ agreement and the applicable legal framework.
1. 02
When a dispute arises between parties who are based in the same country, those parties generally have a choice. They may take
their dispute to their own national law courts. Or they may agree to resolve the dispute in private by incorporating an arbitration
agreement into their contract. Such an arbitration would be a national or ‘domestic’ arbitration, governed by the rules agreed
by the parties and by any mandatory provisions of the local law.
1. 03
The situation is very different when the dispute arises out of a cross-frontier (or transnational) business relationship. Unless
there is an agreement to arbitrate, the aggrieved party will be obliged to take its dispute to a court of law. In that case, it will be
necessary to identify the court that has jurisdiction over the potential defendant. This will usually be the national court in which
the defendant has its place of residence or business—that is to say, the defendant’s home court, which immediately undermines
the idea of a level playing field for the foreign claimant. That claimant may also find that the language of the defendant’s court
is not the language of the contract, that its long-established domestic procedures are not suitable for international disputes, and
that the judges themselves have little or no experience of handling such disputes. It makes sense to avoid such risks by providing
that any disputes arising out of or in connection with such an international contract be referred to international arbitration.
Indeed, in order to ensure an efficient and enforceable dispute resolution process in the transnational environment, international
arbitration has been referred to as ‘the only game in town’. 1
(a) The concept of arbitration
1. 04
International arbitration is a legal process in which parties to a dispute agree to refer that dispute to a tribunal of one or more
independent and impartial arbitrators chosen by or on behalf of the parties to the exclusion of the domestic courts. The task of
that tribunal is to give equal consideration to the claims and defences of the parties and to arrive at a decision on the dispute
pursuant to the applicable legal framework. That decision is given in writing in the form of a binding award which the parties
are obliged to perform without delay and which, in the absence of voluntary compliance, is underpinned by an international
system of recognition and enforcement through local courts.
1. 05
Arbitration, as a method of settling trade and commercial disputes, has a very long history. In its early days, it was a simple and
relatively informal process undertaken without the presence of lawyers. Two merchants or traders in dispute over the price or
quality of goods delivered would agree to refer their dispute to a third merchant or trader, whose independence and judgement
they trusted. The parties would abide by the decision of this honest and usually unpaid ‘arbitrator’, not because of any legal

Section A. - Global Dispute Resolution, UKBC-REDFERN 530638603 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
order or sanction, but because this was what was expected of them in the community in which they carried on their trade or
business. 2  The decision itself would almost certainly take account of any relevant usages or customs of the particular trade
concerned; and the arbitrator might well temper his decision in order to avoid undue hardship, if this seemed appropriate in
all the circumstances of the case. In this sense, arbitration was indeed, as one author has noted, a ‘system of justice, born of
merchants, which brings together law and respect for trade usage’. 3
1. 06
As international trade and commerce developed, arbitration inevitably became more formalised. Nevertheless, respect for trade
usages remained. 4  The influence of chambers of trade and commerce in developing and promoting arbitration to resolve trade
and commercial disputes was (and remains) important. In his classic treatise on ‘Arbitration in International Trade’, 5  Professor
René David refers to the standard form of contract of the Liverpool Cotton Association which included an arbitration clause since
1863. This was undoubtedly a masterstroke. It meant that parties who entered into the standard form contract expressly agreed
that if any disputes arose under that contract, those disputes would not be dealt with by the courts of law but by arbitration under
the aegis of the Cotton Association itself. According to Professor David, the example set by the Liverpool Cotton Association
was quickly followed by the London Corn Trade Association and in Germany by the Cotton Exchange of Bremen, which began
to administer arbitrations in 1872.
1. 07
Following these developments, the London Chamber of Arbitration was founded on 23 November 1892. 6  At the time it was
said with an almost evangelical zeal that:
The Chamber is to have all the virtues that the law lacks. It is to be expeditious where the law is slow, cheap where
the law is costly, simple where the law is technical, a peacemaker instead of a stirrer-up of strife. 7
1. 08
The close association between chambers of commerce and international commercial arbitration has endured, and helps to ensure
that international arbitration, and perhaps more importantly international commercial arbitrators, remain firmly connected to
the realities of international trade and commerce.
(b) The standard form clause
1. 09
The International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) in Paris 8  was the first chamber to concentrate solely on international
commercial disputes. The story is best told by Johnny Veeder, a distinguished counsel and arbitrator with a passion for arbitral
history. In an article 9  quizzically entitled ‘1922: The Birth of the ICC Arbitration Clause and the Demise of the Anglo-Soviet
Urquart Concession’, Veeder refers to the ‘creation of ICC Arbitration in 1922’. This was the year in which the ICC’s Rules for
Arbitration and Conciliation were first published. Veeder says: ‘If international commercial arbitration has a birthday, its year
was undoubtedly 1922’; and he adds that in practice ‘the most significant advance was the standard form ICC arbitration clause
incorporating by reference ICC arbitration rules as a near-comprehensive transnational procedural code’.
1. 10
Veeder’s comment is perceptive. It is a simple matter for parties to put an ‘oven-ready’ arbitration clause into their contract.
The clause itself is usually a simple one. For example, the standard ICC Arbitration Clause reads:
All disputes arising out of or in connection with the present contract shall be finally settled under the Rules of
Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce by one or more arbitrators appointed in accordance with
the said Rules.

Section A. - Global Dispute Resolution, UKBC-REDFERN 530638603 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
It is a simple clause; but it ensures that if there is an arbitration, it will be administered by the ICC and conducted in accordance
with the set of procedural rules drawn up and promulgated by that organisation. These basic rules address how to commence
and pursue an international arbitration and apply to the tribunal and the parties, who will not need to spend time and money at
the outset of the arbitration in drawing up their own basic arbitral rules, as would happen in pure ad hoc arbitrations.
1. 11
The creation of a simple arbitration clause, together with procedural codes drawn up and adapted by arbitral institutions in light
of their practical experience, has been a major driving force in making international arbitration attractive, as a dispute-resolution
process that is in tune with evolving practice and technology. This is one of our themes in this chapter.
(c) The business perspective
1. 12
Nation-states have quickly recognised the increased importance of international arbitration as the servant of international
investment, business, and commerce. Countries around the world have either modernised their existing laws of arbitration or
established new laws to govern and assist the conduct of international arbitrations on their territory. These new laws are often
based on or incorporate the 1985 Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (the ‘Model Law’) 10  which reflects arbitral best practice. A country that adopts the Model Law is
generally seen as a country that is ‘arbitration friendly’ although it is important to review how the Model Law is in fact applied
in practice through that country’s court system.
1. 13
The adoption by a country of a modern international arbitration law helps to reassure investors and to attract potentially profitable
business, not least the business of arbitration itself. 11  Like a stone thrown into a pond, the ripples of an international arbitration
spread in ever-widening circles. A former President of the Arbitration Committee of the ICC, in one of the first articles on
the sociology of international arbitration, 12  referred to ‘the broad spectrum of persons who may be involved in arbitration
proceedings’. In addition to the tribunal, the parties, and their representatives, he included the witnesses, the experts, the
secretary, the translator-interpreter, and the relevant arbitral institution. Almost twenty years later, when Professor Emmanuel
Gaillard gave his Freshfields lecture on the ‘Sociology of International Arbitration’, 13  he added to this cast-list third-party
funders, publishers, and even public relations advisers. He also referred to the nation-states that enforce arbitral awards, courts
that in their judgments help to set international standards, and organisations such as the International Bar Association (IBA)
which, with its published rules and guidelines, helps both to formulate and to promote the ‘soft law’ of international arbitration.
(d) Investment arbitration
1. 14
The growth of international arbitration in recent decades was primarily driven by disputes arising under contracts containing
arbitration agreements. But, two decades ago, it was said that ‘explorers had set out to discover a new continent for international
arbitration’. 14  This ‘new continent’ permitted a qualifying investor with a qualifying investment to commence an international
arbitration against a sovereign state even if it did not have a contract with that sovereign. It was labelled ‘arbitration without
privity’. The principal means to arrive at this new continent was via a network of bilateral and multilateral treaties 15  for the
promotion and protection of investment (including investment chapters in free trade agreements). These treaties revolutionised
international law. They empowered an aggrieved investor to claim directly against a host state (without the intervention of that
investor’s home state) if the investor considered that the host state was in breach of the substantive protections contained in
the relevant investment treaty.
1. 15

Section A. - Global Dispute Resolution, UKBC-REDFERN 530638603 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
The number of arbitrations against states under investment treaties (known generally as ‘investment arbitration’) has grown
extraordinarily. 16  Many of these cases raise issues of public importance and are not subject to the same presumptions of privacy
and confidentiality as ‘commercial’ or ‘contractual’ arbitration. They have also led to procedural developments that are having
an impact on the law and practice of international arbitration more generally, including the admission of amicus curiae briefs
and increased transparency. In the light of the importance of investment arbitration in the world of international arbitration, it
is addressed as a separate topic in Chapter 8.
(e) Other specialist forms of arbitration
1. 16
The success of international arbitration as a method of neutral international dispute resolution away from national courts has
led to its adoption in a growing number of specialist areas. One notable expansion took place in June 1984 when the Court
of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) was established in Lausanne, Switzerland. The idea was to provide a means for the resolution
of disputes related to sport and in particular to offer where necessary (for instance, during the Olympic Games) a rapid and
relatively inexpensive procedure for resolving disputes on such issues as that of an athlete’s entitlement to compete. The work
of the CAS has expanded to include commercial disputes (including, for example, those arising from licensing agreements with
television companies).
1. 17
The expansion of international arbitration continues. Another example of its prospective future use is in the resolution of disputes
under Bilateral Tax Treaties. For example, ‘The Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent
Base Erosion and Profit Shifting’ includes an optional ‘Mandatory Binding Arbitration’ process for resolving disputes. 17  This
option is intended to bring a neutral determinative end to the current unsatisfactory Mutual Assistance Process, which requires
the agreement of the tax authorities of the contracting states for a dispute to be resolved.
(f) An arbitration bar
1. 18
A final indication of the way in which international arbitration has developed and expanded is that there is now a large and
growing ‘arbitration bar’ of specialist arbitration lawyers and advocates located throughout the world, whether in São Paolo,
Moscow, or Washington. Each of these practitioners is regulated by their own national professional code of behaviour. There
is not at present a universally binding international code governing the practice of international arbitration, nor is there any
international governing body. Nevertheless, the existence of a specialist set of lawyers, whether as part of the dispute resolution
group of a major law firm or as a specialist ‘boutique’ law firm dealing only with international arbitration, is testimony to the
growth of international arbitration.
Footnotes
1
Toby Landau KC used this analogy in ‘Arbitral lifelines: The protection of jurisdiction by arbitrators’, in van den Berg
(ed.) International Arbitration 2006: Back to Basics? (Kluwer Law International, 2007), pp. 282–287; and so did Jan
Paulsson when he said: ‘In the transnational environment, international arbitration is the only game. It is a de facto
monopoly.’ (Paulsson, International Arbitration is not Arbitration, Vol. 2 (Stockholm International Arbitration Review,
2008), p. 2.
2
After referring to ‘the dispute resolution mechanisms of the post-classical mercantile world’ that were adopted in
particular trades or trading centres, Lord Mustill comments: ‘Within such communities, external sanctions would have
been largely redundant, even if a legal framework had been available to bring them into play, which in the main it
was not.’ See Mustill, ‘Is it a bird …’, in Reymond (ed.) Liber Amicorum (Litec, 2004), p. 209. To similar effect, see

Section A. - Global Dispute Resolution, UKBC-REDFERN 530638603 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Paulsson, The Idea of Arbitration (Oxford University Press, 2013), p. 1, where he says: ‘The idea of arbitration is that
of the binding resolution of disputes accepted with serenity by those who bear its consequences because of their special
trust in chosen decision-makers.’
3
Serge Lazareff used this illuminating phrase, which describes how arbitration was seen as a way of settling disputes
by reconciling legal principle with equity. See Lazareff, ‘L’arbitre singe ou comment assassiner l’arbitrage’, in Aksen
(ed.) Global Reflections in International Law, Commerce and Dispute Resolution: Liber Amicorum in Honour of Robert
Briner (ICC, 2005), p. 478.
4
Indeed, the present Rules of Arbitration of the ICC still require an arbitral tribunal to take account ‘of any relevant trade
usages’: see the ICC Rules, Art. 21.
5
See David, Arbitration in International Trade (Kluwer, 1985), p. 38.
6
The London Chamber of Arbitration was the predecessor of the LCIA, one of the leading international arbitral
institutions.
7
Manson (1893) IXLQR, cited in Veeder and Dye, ‘Lord Bramwell’s Arbitration Code’ (1992) 8 Arb Intl 330.
8
Arbitral institutions, including the ICC, are discussed later in this chapter.
9
See ‘Global Reflections in Law, Commerce and Dispute Resolution’ ICC Publication 693, at pp. 881–901.
10
The Model Law has been highly successful and has now been adopted by over eighty-five states worldwide. Even
countries that have not explicitly adopted the Model Law have been careful to take full account of it. In England, e.g.,
the departmental committee that advised on what became the Arbitration Act 1996 explicitly stated that any new statute
should ‘so far as possible have the same language and structure as the Model Law, so as to enhance its accessibility
to those who are familiar with the Model Law’: see the report of the Departmental Committee on the Arbitration Bill
1996, at para. 1(7).
11
In a tribute to Johnny Veeder, Professor Park as General Editor referred to the foundation of the journal Arbitration
International in 1984 by Veeder and others and said: ‘At that moment, for better or for worse, international arbitration
found itself moving into the realm of serious big business, leaving behind its earlier status as a “cottage industry”
permeated by the culture of French and Swiss legal artisans or specialists working in particular fields such as insurance
or construction’ (2020) 36 Arb Intl 1.
12
Glossner, ‘Sociological aspects of international commercial arbitration’, in Schultz and van den Berg (eds) The Art of
Arbitration (Kluwer, 1982), pp. 143–152.
13
Gaillard, ‘Sociology of international arbitration’ (2015) 31 Arb Intl 1.
14
J. Paulsson, ‘Arbitration Without Privity’ (1995) 10(2) ICSID Review Foreign Investment Law Journal 232.
15
One example of a multilateral investment treaty is the Energy Charter Treaty which has been ratified by over fifty
countries.
16
Statistics reported by ICSID show that 469 cases were registered under the ICSID Convention and Additional Facility
Rules between 2012 and 30 June 2021, compared to 274 cases registered between 2002 and 2011. See ICSID Caseload
—Statistics (ICSID, 2021), p. 7.
17
See Mooij, ‘Tax treaty arbitration’ (2019) 35 Arb Intl 195.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
