Introductory remarks, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406939 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Introductory remarks
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
26-1
The oral hearings are the focal point of any ICC arbitration. 411  The hearings may be split into a hearing of the evidence and a
separate hearing for legal argument. If so, the hearings are usually linked, so that the hearing for the legal argument takes place
reasonably promptly after the evidentiary hearings or the submission of post-hearing briefs. Some arbitrators seek to limit this
period to two to three weeks after the closing of the hearings or receipt of the post-hearing briefs if they are filed. However,
for the authors, if the parties have an agreed preference as to the timing of those submissions, the parties' preference should
generally be followed.
26-2
When the Tribunal establishes the provisional timetable pursuant to art.24(2), the various steps in the procedure are often
planned with regard to a specific date for the oral hearings. The parties usually make substantial written submissions during
the period from the establishment of the Terms of Reference to the oral hearings and Tribunals will give particular attention to
those submissions immediately prior to the hearings.
26-3
In the preparation of their cases, the parties have the advantage of discussing the events relating to the dispute with the factual
and expert witnesses. The oral hearings are important because they provide the Tribunal with the opportunity to have this
personal contact with the witnesses to, in essence, bring the evidence to life. Therefore, although the Tribunal will have studied
the submissions, and have noted the differences in the positions of the parties, the oral hearings provide an opportunity to focus
on these differences to weigh the related evidence.
26-4
In preparing for the oral hearings, several basic principles should be kept in mind. The Tribunal will have read the parties’
submissions as well as the witness statements and the key documents in detail, although one of the basic points of hearings is
often to deal with contradictions amongst witnesses and between witnesses and documents. Frequently, although not always,
one of the key issues is a question of interpretation of the contemporaneous documentary record, as many arbitrators view this
record as inherently more reliable than the undocumented recollections of witnesses.
Footnotes
411
The 2021 Rules have left art.26 unchanged from the 2017 Rules, except for the addition of the first sentence in art.26(1)
(which was in part in art.25(2) previously) and the addition of a reference to holding hearings remotely in art.26(1).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
