Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638598 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration
1. 112
When parties are negotiating an international agreement, the last thing on their minds is probably the question of how to resolve
any potential disputes. It is nonetheless a question that needs to be addressed; and it is probably best addressed by the parties
during the contract negotiations, whilst relations are good and the prospect of any dispute appears remote.
1. 113
There are a variety of options to be considered, starting with those that come under the general heading of ADR, the acronym
for Alternative Dispute Resolution. 95
(a) Mediation
1. 114
One of the most effective forms of ADR is mediation. A mediator is someone who has no connection with the parties or their
contract, but who is engaged to help them to resolve their differences. To do this in an international commercial dispute, the
mediator will usually study the relevant evidence and documents and listen to the parties’ complaints and arguments, including
their commercial objectives. The mediator will then, as an observer with an objective understanding of what is in issue, attempt
to persuade the parties to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute by focusing on their real commercial interests, rather than
on what they perceive to be their legal entitlement. Unlike an arbitrator, a mediator cannot issue a binding decision but merely
acts as a facilitator with a view to promoting an agreement between the parties and, for that reason, has complete flexibility with
regard to procedure. Indeed, unlike an arbitration, in mediation it is common for mediators to meet with each party separately
(as well as together) in order to try and broker an acceptable agreement.
1. 115
In the past, the terms ‘mediator’ and ‘conciliator’ were frequently used as if they were interchangeable (as evidenced by the
2002 UNCITRAL ‘Model Law on International Conciliation’). However, the term ‘mediator’ has now prevailed in general
use and practice.
1. 116
The time taken by an international arbitration and its expense have led to a renewed interest in the development of mediation as a
tool for dispute resolution in international contracts. In that context, UNCITRAL updated its 2002 ‘Model Law on International
Conciliation’ with the 2018 ‘UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Mediation and International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation’. In its own terms, ‘The Model Law is designed to assist States in reforming and
modernizing their laws on mediation procedure. It provides uniform rules in respect of the mediation process and aims at
encouraging the use of mediation and ensuring greater predictability and certainty in its use.’
1. 117
Contemporaneously with the publication of the 2018 Model Law, UNCITRAL Working Group II (dispute resolution) developed
the Convention on International Settlement Agreements resulting from Mediation, which was adopted on 20 December 2018
by the General Assembly of the United Nations and entered into force on 12 September 2020. As of April 2022, the Convention
(referred to as the Singapore Convention) has been signed by fifty-five states and ratified by only nine states. 96  The Convention
requires states to recognise and enforce international settlement agreements resulting from mediation that have been concluded
in writing. It deliberately excludes any settlement agreement enforceable as an arbitral award (which would usually be a consent

Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638598 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
award) to avoid overlap with the New York Convention. As a consequence, covered settlement agreements no longer have to be
enforced in member states as a simple contract in accordance with domestic court procedures but are rather directly recognised
and enforced.
1. 118
If parties wish to include mediation as a preliminary tool in the dispute resolution provision of their international contract, then
it would be appropriate to incorporate language noting that they will first attempt to resolve any dispute for a fixed period
(perhaps sixty or ninety days) by good faith negotiations, if necessary with the assistance of a neutral mediator to be selected
by the parties (with a fallback institutional nomination), failing which the dispute will be referred to binding arbitration under
a set of institutional rules. 97
(b) Multi-tiered dispute resolution provisions
1. 119
Many international agreements are for long-term projects. There might, for instance, be an agreement between a state and a
major engineering company for the construction of a dam or a motorway; or a long-term agreement for the production and
shipping of LNG from the gas supplier to a power plant several hundred miles away. It is important that if a dispute arises it
should not hold up the work of construction, with perhaps hundreds of workers on site, or the delivery of the cargoes of liquid
gas, with gas tankers at sea. What is needed is a dispute resolution provision that allows the work or transport to continue whilst
the dispute is resolved.
1. 120
Many standard form contracts used on major engineering or construction contracts now contain provisions for some form of
multi-tiered resolution of the dispute. 98  These include ‘mandatory negotiation’, which obliges the senior management of the
disputants to meet and try to negotiate a settlement by taking an overall view of the case, rather than by adhering to an entrenched
position that was perhaps adopted by the participants at site level. They also include provisions for the interim determination of
the dispute by a ‘Disputes Resolution Board’ 99  or a ‘Panel of Experts’, who will act in a quasi-judicial role and whose decision
will be binding on the parties, unless it is reversed by an agreement between the parties or by a subsequent reference to a national
court or to international arbitration. For example, the ‘World Bank Standard Bidding Documents for the Procurement of Works’
generally follows the provisions of the FIDIC Red Book providing that any dispute, including a dispute as to the engineer’s
evaluation of the work, is to be referred for decision to a Dispute Avoidance/Adjudication Board (DAAB) constituted by the
parties themselves. 100  That decision will be binding on the parties unless revised by a subsequent amicable settlement by the
parties, which should take place before any reference to arbitration. If any party is still dissatisfied, the dispute will be referred
to arbitration under the rules of arbitration agreed by the parties or, if there is no agreement, under the ICC Rules of Arbitration.
1. 121
The use of ADR provisions in standard form or model contracts promoted by multilateral financial institutions and professional
organisations is an indication of their success in the resolution of disputes. However, parties may go through the ADR process
and still remain persuaded that their evidence or their arguments have not received the attention they deserve or that insufficient
attention has been paid to the facts or the law. If so, the next decision for the aggrieved party is (depending on its contract)
whether to take its grievance to the national courts or to international arbitration.
(c) The advantage of arbitration
(i) ‘The only game in town’
1. 122

Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638598 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
The model and the standard forms of international contract to which reference has been made above provide for international
arbitration as the final part of the dispute resolution process. They do so for good reason. International arbitration gives
the parties the opportunity of resolving their dispute: (i) in a neutral place of arbitration; (ii) by a tribunal of experienced,
independent, and impartial arbitrators; (iii) selected by or on behalf of the parties themselves for their suitability for the task;
(iv) working in the language of the contract and of the frequently voluminous documents that form part of that contract;
and (v) in a manner which will result in a binding decision that is internationally enforceable. In the international context,
there is really no competition from the local courts. International arbitration may well be described, as stated earlier, as ‘the
only game in town’.
1. 123
In addition to the points already made about neutrality, and the ability of the parties to select a tribunal of arbitrators who
are skilled in their work as well as being independent and impartial, there are other advantages to international arbitration
that should be briefly touched upon.
(ii) Enforcement
1. 124
First and foremost is the fact that the awards of international arbitral tribunals are enforceable by courts worldwide because
of a network of international treaties and conventions, of which the New York Convention is still the most important. These
treaties and conventions have greater acceptance internationally than treaties for the reciprocal enforcement of judgments. 101
(iii) Privacy and confidentiality
1. 125
A distinction needs to be made between privacy and confidentiality. Proceedings in an international arbitration are usually
private. There is no public gallery for spectators, no journalists or reporters publishing details of the proceedings in the
public press. It used to be possible to say that arbitrations were also confidential such that the evidence, the arguments, the
submissions of the parties, and the awards of the arbitrators were only made known if the parties agreed or if there was
some public duty to disclose them. This once general principle of confidentiality has been partially eroded in the quest for
transparency, although the evidence is that where confidentiality exists it is still greatly valued by the parties, particularly in
international commercial arbitrations. In international investment arbitrations, transparency has gained most traction since
the matters at issue usually involve reviewing the legality of state measures and the possible payment of damages from the
public purse. In those circumstances, there has been great pressure to open up the system to the public (and the taxpayer)
who have an interest in calling their governments to account and in seeing the operation of a process where their taxpayer
funds are employed. The consequence of this increased demand for transparency in the field of investment arbitration is
addressed in detail in Chapter 8.
1. 126
An important question is to what extent the move for transparency is likely to ‘spill-over’ from investment arbitration to
international commercial arbitration, which is based on private contracts rather than on public treaties and does not involve
the disbursement of public funds. At present, the demarcation line between the two types of arbitration seems to be observed.
For example, in 2010 Australia adopted a rule that proceedings would not be confidential unless the parties ‘opted in’ to such
confidentiality. 102  This rule proved so unpopular that it was reversed by legislation in 2015. Now confidentiality is once
again the rule in Australia, with the parties free to ‘opt out’ of that rule if they wish to do so. 103  It has been clear for some
years that the privacy and confidentiality of arbitral proceedings, which together were regarded as considerable advantages
of international commercial arbitration, can no longer be taken for granted. The debate as to privacy and confidentiality is
one of increasing importance. It is more fully explored in the next chapter.

Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638598 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
(iv) Adaptability
1. 127
Arbitration is an extremely adaptable process, as its history shows. Arbitration can equally well resolve the value of a piece of
jewellery in a dispute between two merchants as it can a billion-dollar dispute between two multinational corporations. There
are certain basic principles to be followed in the course of an arbitration (for instance that of treating the parties equally and
giving them an opportunity to state their case) but there is no code of civil procedure to be followed. In short, an arbitration
can be tailored to meet the specific requirements of the dispute, rather than being treated as if ‘one-size-fits-all’. 104  It has
been said that every arbitration is a ‘microcosm of potential procedural reform’.
(v) Finality of the award
1. 128
The decision of a court of law may be subject to an appeal first to a court of appeal and then to a supreme court. This is
no doubt good for the development of a country’s legal system (as well as for its lawyers). It helps to build a known and
reasonably predictable code of law. It is less useful for the individual corporations or individuals who have to finance the
process and wait, possibly for years, for its final outcome. Subject to very limited grounds for review of an arbitral award
discussed in Chapter 10, the award marks the end of the dispute. There is usually no ladder of appeals to be climbed.
(d) Disadvantages of international arbitration
(i) Multiparty arbitrations, joinder, and consolidation
1. 129
There are inevitably disadvantages to international arbitration. For a start, any arbitration, whether national or international,
is based on the consent of the parties. Without consent, there is no valid arbitration.
1. 130
There are cases, for example, where the parties to an arbitration may wish to add (or join) a third party who is in some way
involved in the dispute, such as a parent company, a subcontractor or an insurer. It may often make sense to add (or join)
this third party, so as to resolve all outstanding disputes consistently in the same forum. However, in arbitration there may
be problems in doing so absent demonstration of consent by the third party.
1. 131
Alternatively, there may be two arbitrations between the same parties based on essentially the same facts, but with the claimant
in the first arbitration being named as the respondent in the second. It would make sense to consolidate the two arbitrations
(that is, to bring them before the same arbitral tribunal) but, again, there may be problems in doing this.
1. 132
Problems such as these (multiparty arbitrations, the joinder of additional parties, the consolidation of arbitrations, and so
forth) have troubled the users of arbitration for many years. In the celebrated Dutco case, 105  there were two respondents
who each wanted to nominate an arbitrator. Under the former ICC Rules, they could not do this. They were instead required
to nominate one arbitrator between them. They did so under protest—but a complaint was made to the French court, which
said that the right of each party to nominate an arbitrator was part of French public policy and could not be waived. As
a consequence, the ICC had to devise new rules to deal with such a situation. These new Rules state that where there are

Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638598 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
multiple claimants or multiple respondents and the parties are unable to agree on a method for the constitution of the arbitral
tribunal, the ICC Court itself may appoint each member of the tribunal and designate one as president. 106
1. 133
As international trade, commerce, and investment become more complex and global, there are an increasing number of
multiparty disputes. For example, a car manufacturer based in Germany may have contracts with suppliers in other countries
for the manufacture and supply of components. Any defects in the final product may mean that the German manufacturer will
have claims against several suppliers in different locations and subject to different contracts, as it seeks to establish liability
for the defects and compensation for its losses.
1. 134
The leading arbitral institutions are well aware of the different problems that might arise and they have taken (or are taking)
action to address them, so far as this is possible within the limits of ‘party consent’. 107  For example, the ICC Rules give the
arbitral tribunal (in Article 7.5) the authority to decide (under certain conditions) whether or not a party should be joined to
the proceedings in response to a request for joinder. Similarly, the LCIA Rules contain provisions (in Article 22A) that give
an arbitral tribunal (under certain conditions and subject to the approval of the LCIA Court) the power to consolidate any
other arbitrations that are subject to the LCIA Rules. These provisions, and other developments of the powers of the arbitral
institutions to consolidate, are considered in Chapter 2.
(ii) Non-signatories
1. 135
The problem of the so-called non-signatory occurs when a claimant wishes to include a person or a legal entity that is not
formally a signatory to the arbitration agreement as a corespondent or (less commonly) where an entity wishes to start a claim
pursuant to a contract in which it has an interest but has not signed. A common example is that of a claimant with a dispute
under a contract between itself and a thinly capitalised local subsidiary of a major international corporation. The contract
contains an arbitration clause and so arbitration can be compelled against the subsidiary company—but the claimant would
like to add the parent company to the arbitration, so as to improve its chances of being paid if it succeeds in its claim. Is it
possible to do this, if the parent company is not a signatory to the contract?
1. 136
At this point it is sufficient to say (in very general terms) that the key issue is whether there is any ‘deemed’ or ‘assumed’,
consent to arbitration. Various legal theories or doctrines have been developed to try to establish such assumed consent,
including the ‘group of companies’ doctrine, the ‘reliance’ theory, the concept of agency, and the US concept of ‘piercing
the corporate veil’ (so that, for example, a parent company may be taken to be responsible for the actions of a subsidiary that
is a mere shell and, accordingly, be treated as if it were a party to any contract made by that subsidiary). 108  This problem
is discussed in more detail later, in Chapter 2.
(iii) Conflicting awards
1. 137
There is no system of binding precedent in international arbitration—that is, there is no rule that an award on a particular issue,
or a particular set of facts, is binding on different parties or arbitrators confronted with similar issues or similar facts. 109  Each
award stands on its own. An arbitral tribunal that is required (for example) to interpret a particular reinsurance policy may
arrive at a different conclusion from that of another tribunal faced with the same question. If the award of the first tribunal
is known (and it may not be known, because of confidentiality), it may be of persuasive effect, but no more. The issue is
even more acute in investment arbitration where two tribunals constituted to hear the claims of two shareholders in the same
company subject to the same state measures may reach diametrically opposed solutions. 110
1. 138

Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638598 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
The problem of conflicting decisions is a real one. One proposed solution is to create a new international court for resolving
disputes over the enforcement of arbitral awards. But this has been described as ‘the impossible dream’. 111  Proposals for a
broader appeal mechanism have been made in relation to investment arbitration to ensure consistency between decisions. 112
Indeed, the EU has incorporated arbitral appeal mechanisms into some Investment Protection Agreements. 113  This may suit
lawyers and arbitrators, who might welcome consistency of decisions, but it might not suit business people who are looking
for a rapid solution to their dispute, rather than for the opportunity to contribute at their own expense to the development
of the law.
(iv) Judicialisation
1. 139
There has been for many years a continuing discussion about the increasing ‘judicialisation’ of international arbitration:
meaning both that arbitrations tend to be conducted more frequently with the procedural intricacy and formality
more native to litigation in national courts and that they are more often subjected to judicial intervention and
control. 114
1. 140
The problem is most evident in the United States, 115  where there is a tradition of broad-ranging ‘discovery’ in civil litigation.
The US practice of ‘discovery’ describes seeking out and collecting pre-trial evidence. Such evidence takes two forms:
witness testimony and the production of documents.
1. 141
If US-style witness depositions are ordered in an arbitration, witnesses may be required to give oral testimony and to be cross-
examined on oath by the parties’ counsel. Their responses are recorded in a transcript which is then made available for use
in the arbitration proceedings as a ‘pre-trial deposition’. So far as the production of documents is concerned, 116  the parties
to an arbitration may be ordered to disclose generally documents that are relevant and material to the issues in dispute, even
if the party that has possession, custody, or control of the documents does not wish to produce them. In a major arbitration,
the task of tracing and assembling these documents may take months and cost considerable sums of money, with phrases
such as ‘warehouse discovery’ only palely reflecting the scope of the work to be done. Since the term ‘documents’ includes
emails and other electronically stored information (ESI), the time and costs involved in tracing and assembling the relevant
material has increased dramatically. 117  One US lawyer summed up the position in an article, whose title says it all: ‘How
the creep of United States litigation-style discovery and appellate rights affects the efficiency and cost-efficacy of arbitration
in the United States’. 118
1. 142
This trend towards ‘judicialisation’ is not confined to the United States. The artisanal approach of the arbitration practitioner
as master craftsman has undergone something of an industrial revolution. As previously stated, arbitration has become big
business undertaken by large teams of lawyers who produce voluminous work product. Inevitably, this increases the workload
of the arbitral tribunal: in reaching its decision, the tribunal must give proper consideration to the documents and evidence
before it, as part of its duty to proceed judicially—giving each party a proper opportunity to present its case and treating each
party equally, on pain of having the arbitral award set aside for procedural irregularity. 119
1. 143
Various ways of dealing with the resulting growth in complexity, cost, and procedural schedules have been canvassed. For
example, there has been a proposal for a return to ‘first principles’, so that the arbitral tribunal would ask in respect of each
particular arbitration:
 
(i)what is the best way of dealing with this case?
 
(ii)do the parties want a full trial of their dispute whatever it costs? or

Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638598 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
 
(iii)to save time and money would they be prepared to accept a shortened procedure, recognising that this would limit
their opportunity to develop their respective cases as meticulously as they might wish? 120
(v) Costs
1. 144
International arbitration was once a relatively inexpensive method of dispute resolution. It is no longer so. First, the fees
and expenses of the arbitrators (unlike the salary of a judge) must be paid by the parties—and in international arbitrations
of any significance, these charges are likely to be substantial. Secondly, it may be necessary to pay the administrative fees
and expenses of an arbitral institution—and these too may be substantial (and it may also be necessary to appoint a secretary
or ‘administrative assistant’ to administer the proceedings). Finally, in the event of physical hearings it will be necessary to
hire rooms and associated facilities rather than make use of the public facilities of the courts of law. In the event of virtual
hearings, IT specialists will usually have to be hired to manage the complexities of conducting a hearing virtually from
multiple countries through a single platform.
1. 145
But the fees of the arbitrators and of the arbitral institutions, the charges for room hire, the costs of court reporters and IT
specialists, and other such expenses are usually a drop in the ocean compared with the fees and expenses of the parties’
legal advisers and expert witnesses. In a major arbitration, these may easily run into several million dollars. 121  This means
that international arbitration is not likely to be cheaper than proceedings in domestic courts, unless there is a very conscious
effort to make it so. 122
1. 146
One point that should not be forgotten in considering the cost of arbitration, however, is that it is a form of ‘one-stop shopping’.
Although the initial cost may not be less than that of proceedings in court, the award of the arbitrators is unlikely to be
followed by a series of costly appeals to superior local courts.
(vi) Delay
1. 147
Finally, a major complaint is that of delay, particularly at the beginning and at the end of the arbitral process. At the beginning,
the complaint is of the time that it may take to constitute an arbitral tribunal, so that the arbitral process can start to move
forward. 123  At the end of the arbitration, the complaint is of the time that some arbitral tribunals take to issue their award,
with months (and sometimes a year or more) passing between the submission of post-hearing briefs and the delivery of the
long-awaited decision. 124
(vii) Summary
1. 148
As the debate about costs and delay continues, it is important to remember that the aim of international arbitration is not
simply to determine a dispute as quickly and cheaply as possible. If the parties agreed, that could be done with the spin of a
coin. The aim of international arbitration is to arrive at a fair and reasoned decision on a dispute, based on a proper evaluation
of the relevant contract, the facts, and the law. As Professor Park has written:
Much of the criticism of arbitration’s costs and delay thus tells only half the story, often with subtexts portending
a cure worse than the disease. An arbitrator’s main duty lies not in dictating a peace treaty, but in delivery of
an accurate award that rests on a reasonable view of what happened and what the law says. Finding that reality
in a fair manner does not always run quickly or smoothly. Although good case management values speed and

Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638598 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
economy, it does so with respect for the parties’ interest in correct decisions. The parties have no less interest in
correct decisions than in efficient proceedings. An arbitrator who makes the effort to listen before deciding will
enhance both the prospect of accuracy and satisfaction of the litigant’s taste for fairness. In the long run, little
satisfaction will come from awards that are quick and cheap at the price of being systematically wrong. 125
1. 149
At one time, the comparative advantages and disadvantages of international arbitration versus litigation were much
debated. 126  That debate should now be over. Opinion has moved strongly in favour of international arbitration for the
resolution of international disputes.
Footnotes
95
A clear and concise guide to the various forms of ADR is provided in Jenkins, International Construction Arbitration
Law (3rd edn, Wolters Kluwer, 2021), pp. 141–165.
96
As of April 2022, the states who have ratified the Convention are Singapore, Fiji, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Belarus, Ecuador,
Honduras, Georgia and Turkey.
97
Model clauses for the appointment of a mediator are provided by various institutions, including arbitral institutions such
as the ICC and specialist institutions such as the ‘Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution’ (CEDR), which focuses on
mediation for the resolution of commercial disputes and also runs training courses for potential mediators.
98
‘Tiered Dispute Resolution Precedents’ are fully and helpfully discussed in Jenkins, International Construction
Arbitration Law (3rd edn, Wolters Kluwer, 2021), pp. 66–99 under the title of ‘Dispute Avoidance and Resolution’.
99
See ibid., at pp. 121–140.
100
See Standard Bidding Documents, Procurement of Works (World Bank, 2020), p. 145; Conditions of Contract for
Construction for Building and Engineering Works Designed by the Employer (2nd edn, FIDIC, 2017), pp. 100–107.
101
There is a multilateral treaty for the recognition and enforcement of court judgments made in the EU member states
and Switzerland: Council Regulation (EC) No. 44/2001 of 22 December 2000 on jurisdiction and the recognition and
enforcement of judgment in civil and commercial matters, OJ L 12/1, 16 January 2001 (formerly the Brussels and Lugano
Conventions). The Common Market of the South (Mercado Común del Sur, or Mercosur), comprising Argentina, Brazil,
Paraguay, and Uruguay, has also established the Las Leñas Protocol for the mutual recognition and enforcement of
judgments from Mercosur states within the region. The Hague Conference on Private International Law has drawn up
a Convention on Choice of Court Agreements, under which a judgment by the court of a contracting state designated
in an exclusive ‘choice of court agreement’ would be recognised and enforced in other contracting states. At time of
writing, the Convention has been signed by the European Union (EU), China, Israel, Montenegro, the Republic of
North-Macedonia, Singapore, Ukraine, and the United States, and entered into force on 1 October 2015 (see https://
www.hcch.net/en/instruments/conventions/status-table/?cid=98).
102
See the International Arbitration Amendment Act 2010, s. 22(3).
103
See the International Arbitration Amendment Act 1947, as amended, ss. 22–23.
104
Chapter 6, which deals amongst other things with the use of fast-track procedures, has more to say on this topic.
105
BKMI and Siemens v Dutco, French Cass. Civ. 1ere, 7 January 1992, [1992] Bull Civ 1. This case is discussed more
fully in Chapter 2.
106
This provision of the ICC Rules, first adopted in 1998, works reasonably well in practice, although it removes the right
of the parties to nominate an arbitrator if they are unable to agree how this should be done. Interestingly, this is the very
issue on which the French court took its stand, the ‘fundamental’ right of a party to nominate its own arbitrator! Other
institutional rules contain similar provisions.
107
Problems of multi-party arbitrations, joinder, and consolidation are considered in more detail in Chapter 2.
108
See Hanotiau, Complex Arbitrations: Multi-party, Multi-contract, Multi-issue—A Comparative Study (2nd edn,
International Law Library, 2020), pp. 95–196.
109
See Kaufmann-Kohler, ‘Arbitral precedent: Dream, necessity or excuse? The 2006 Freshfields Lecture’ (2007) 23 Arb
Intl 357.
110
For instance, in Ronald Lauder v Czech Republic, Final Award, UNCITRAL, 3 September 2001 and in CME v Czech
Republic, Final Award, UNCITRAL, 14 March 2003, two claims brought in respect of a single dispute, involving virtually

Section D. - ADR, Litigation, and Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638598 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
undisputed facts, produced conflicting awards from arbitral tribunals in London and Stockholm, as well as giving rise
to litigation in the Czech Republic, the United States, and Sweden: see Brower, Brower II, and Sharpe, ‘The coming
crisis in the global adjudication system’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 424; Cremades and Madalena, ‘Parallel proceedings in
international arbitration’ (2008) 24 Arb Intl 507. See also Professor Kaj Hobér’s review: Hobér, ‘Res judicata and lis
pendens in international arbitration’, in Hague Academy of International Law, Collected Courses of the Hague Academy
of International Law, Vol. 366 (Martinus Nijhoff, 2014), pp. 99-406.
111
Howard M. Holtzmann, cited in Brower, Brower II, and Sharpe, ‘The coming crisis in the global adjudication
system’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 424, at 435.
112
See, e.g., Potesta and Kaufmann-Kohler, ‘Can the Mauritius Convention serve as a model for the reform of investor-state
arbitration in connection with the introduction of a permanent investment tribunal or an appeal mechanism?—Analysis
and roadmap, (3 June 2016). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3455511 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.3455511. The issue is also discussed in Platt, ‘The appeal of appeal mechanisms in international arbitration:
Fairness over finality?’ (2013) 30(5) J Intl Arb 531.
113
See Chapter Three of the EU–Vietnam Investment Protection Agreement which entered into force on 1 August 2020
and incorporates an arbitration appeal provision for investment arbitrations at Art. 3.39.
114
Brower, ‘W(h)ither international commercial arbitration?’ (2008) 24 Arb Intl 181, at 183.
115
See, e.g., Seidenberg, ‘International arbitration loses its grip: Are US lawyers to blame?’ (2010) ABA Journal 51:
‘Arbitration was supposed to be the solution for international companies seeking to resolve disputes without expensive
and drawn-out court battles. But it is starting to look more like the problem [ … ] Arbitration of international commercial
disputes has taken on many of the characteristics of litigation in US Courts. And this has upset many companies that
rely on arbitration to resolve cross-border business disputes.’
116
In English High Court litigation, the term ‘Discovery’ is used to cover only the production of documents.
117
The problem posed by ESI has been addressed, amongst many others, by the British Chartered Institute of Arbitrators
(CIArb), with its 2008 Protocol for E-Disclosure in Arbitration. The 2020 IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in
International Arbitration provide for targeted disclosure of documents, rather than warehouse discovery.
118
Rievman, Paper presented at a conference sponsored by the Centre for International Legal Studies, February 2005; see
also Baker, ‘At what price perfect justice?’, Presented as part of a coursebook for the 2009 Annual Meeting of the
International Institute for Conflict Prevention and Resolution, New York, 15–16 January 2009.
See, e.g., Redfern, ‘Stemming the tide of judicialisation in international arbitration’ (2008) 2 World Arb & Med Rev 21,
at 24: ‘It would be comforting, at least for non US lawyers, if it could be assumed that the blight of increasing expense and
delay in international arbitration is unique to the United States. It would be wrong, however, to make this assumption.’
119
For instance, under New York Convention, Art. V, or Model Law, Art. 36.
120
See, e.g., Rivkin, ‘Towards a new paradigm in international arbitration: The town elder model revisited’ (2008) 24 Arb
Intl 3, at 378.
121
There are many reasons for this, including (i) the considerable sums of money that are often at stake; (ii) the
increasing professionalism of lawyers, accountants, and others engaged in the arbitral process, with a determination to
leave no stone unturned (which may lead to excessively lengthy and repetitive submissions); and (iii) the increasing
‘judicialisation’ of international arbitration, which has been discussed earlier.
122
One of the objectives of this book is to show how this can be achieved by skilled and effective case management.
123
For example, under the ICDR Rules, forty-five days may elapse after receipt of the notice of arbitration before the
administrator is requested to appoint the arbitrator(s) and designate the presiding arbitrator, and this process may take
further time, with the need to find suitable candidates who have no conflict of interest: see ICDR Rules 2021, Art. 13.3.
124
One of the reasons for delay is the workload of the chosen arbitrators, particularly if they have other professional
commitments, e.g. as counsel or as university professors. Ever more frequent challenges to arbitral awards have also
provoked extreme caution from arbitrators resulting in ever more detailed reasoning and description of the steps taken in
the arbitral process. Where awards have to be simultaneously issued in more than one language is also a source of delay.
125
Park, ‘Arbitration and accuracy’ (2010) 1 J Intl Disp Settlement 27.
126
For one of the most effective, and certainly the most entertaining, critiques of arbitration see Kerr, ‘Arbitration v
litigation: The Macao Sardine case’, in Kerr, As Far As I Remember (Hart Publishing, 2002), Annex.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
