No Appointment of Emergency Arbitrator in case Tribunal..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
No Appointment of Emergency Arbitrator in case Tribunal has
received the File
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
No Appointment of Emergency Arbitrator in case Tribunal has received the File
29-42
The President will refrain from appointing an Emergency Arbitrator in the event that the Secretariat has transmitted the file to the
Tribunal at the same time the Application was submitted to the President, art.2(2) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. In practice,
this scenario is unlikely to happen, since any applicant will be able to know, in consultation with the Secretariat. However,
it does leave open the possibility of Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings well after the filing of the Request for Arbitration if
the Tribunal has not been constituted. For example, a claimant was permitted to commence Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings
a month after having filed a Request for Arbitration. In another case, a respondent was permitted to commence Emergency
Arbitrator Proceedings after it filed a counterclaim (which was considered the equivalent of a Request for Arbitration). 568
29-43
Article 2(2) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules underscores the fact that the first condition of admissibility of the Application
must still be satisfied when the President is about to appoint the Emergency Arbitrator, which normally will occur 24 or 48
hours after the Secretariat concluded that this first condition is met, and therefore transferred the Application to the ICC Court’s
President. Article 2(2) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules is important inasmuch as it clearly informs any applicant that under
the Rules it will not be entitled to the appointment of an Emergency Arbitrator once the Tribunal has been seized with the file.
Footnotes
568
Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration, Annex I, Part D.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
