Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section E. - Collecting Evidence
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 6 - Conduct of the Proceedings
Section E. - Collecting Evidence
(a) Introduction
6. 74
It is impossible to collect comprehensive and reliable statistics in relation to international commercial arbitrations, which are
often confidential, but it is probably reasonable to assume that in most cases the tribunal’s decision depends on the particular
facts and provisions of the contract, rather than on the application of relevant principles of law.
6. 75
It follows that fact-finding is one of the most significant functions of an arbitral tribunal. The relevant facts are determined either
by evaluating the presentation by the parties of documentary and/or oral evidence, or by arbitral tribunals making their own
efforts, with the assistance of the parties to ascertain the evidence that they consider necessary to establish the relevant facts.
(i) Civil law and common law procedures
6. 76
In court procedures in most common law countries, the initiative for the collection and presentation of evidence is almost
wholly in the hands of the parties. The judge acts as a kind of referee, to administer the applicable rules of evidence and
to give a decision at the end on who has ‘won’ the argument in a combative sense. The judge listens to the evidence and
may question the witnesses; in general, however, common law judges leave it to the parties to present their respective cases
and then form a judgment on the basis of what the parties elect to present to the court. By contrast, in the courts of many
civil law countries, the judge takes a far more active role in the conduct of the proceedings and in the collection of evidence,
including the examination of witnesses. 74
6. 77
The impression we may have given by these brief summaries of the two systems is that the differences are fundamental.
Yet there is a considerable risk of over-generalisation in drawing distinctions, as we have just done, between the so-called
common law and civil law systems. Each system has many variations. The rules of procedure in the United States are different
from those in England, just as the German and French rules of procedure are different.
6. 78
Emphasising this point, a Swiss international arbitration specialist stated:
My first remark is that there is no such thing as ‘Civil Law procedure’ in civil and commercial litigation.
In Common Law countries, there are undoubtedly certain common basic principles of procedure, which go
back to the procedure practised in the English courts. In continental Europe, there is no such common origin.
In each country, one finds a different blend of civil procedure, largely influenced by local custom, the legal
education received by judges and by counsel, and, to a varied extent, by the influence of the procedure practised
in the old ecclesiastical courts, although such courts were abolished, in Protestant countries, at the time of the
Reformation. [ … ]

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
The result of this is that there is possibly as much difference between the outlook and practice of a French avocat
and of a German Rechtsanwalt as between those of an English and of an Italian lawyer. The same applies within
my own country, Switzerland, where civil and criminal procedure remain in the realm of the 26 sovereign States
of the Confederation, thus leading to the existence of 26 different codes of civil or criminal procedure, plus
a Civil Procedure Act for the Federal Supreme Court. There is as much difference between the type of civil
procedure practised in Geneva and that practised in Zurich as between those featured in Madrid and Stockholm.
These differences are experienced daily in international arbitration, where they are sometimes the source of
great difficulties. Certainly these difficulties are due, to a large extent, to the different patterns of civil procedure
law, but, in my experience, to a far greater extent to the undisclosed assumptions and prejudices of municipal
lawyers faced for the first time in their lives with a system of which they are not aware. Just to take a simple
example, a common lawyer expects the claimant as a matter of course to have the last word at the end of the
day, whereas a continental lawyer considers it a requirement of natural justice that the defendant should be the
last to address the Court. 75
6. 79
Nevertheless, there is probably just enough uniformity in the usual approach to such matters as the presentation of evidence
to justify using the expression ‘civil law countries’ by way of contrast to the ‘common law countries’ in the discussion that
follows. Where there are differences between the two systems, they are most noticeable in the procedures that lead to fact-
finding. The most important elements include the following.
(ii) Admissibility
6. 80
In practice, tribunals composed of three experienced international arbitrators from different legal systems approach the
question of the reception of evidence in a pragmatic way. Whether they are from common law or civil law countries, they
tend to focus on establishing the facts necessary for the determination of the issues between the parties and are reluctant to
be limited by technical rules of evidence that might prevent them from achieving this goal. This is especially so where the
rules in question were originally designed for use in jury trials, centuries ago, at a time when many jurors were not able to
read or write, so that it was necessary for documents to be read aloud at hearings.
6. 81
It is essential for practitioners who have been raised in the common law tradition to appreciate this and to learn not to rely
overly on technical rules from their own jurisdictions concerning the admissibility of evidence during the course of the
proceedings, particularly at witness hearings. Conversely, where all three arbitrators come from the same legal tradition,
whether common law or civil law, it is nevertheless sensible for the team of lawyers retained to represent each party to include
at least one member who is familiar with the approach to the presentation and reception of evidence that that particular arbitral
tribunal is likely to apply. 76
(iii) Burden of proof
6. 82
A question that often arises in an international arbitration is that of knowing which party has the responsibility for proving a
particular allegation or set of allegations. The generally accepted answer is that the ‘burden of proof’ of any particular factual
allegation is upon that party which makes the allegation. This is recognised explicitly in Article 27.1 of the UNCITRAL
Rules: ‘Each party will have the burden of proving the facts relied on to support its claim or defence.’ The UNCITRAL
Rules then go on to make it clear that this burden of proof may be discharged by the evidence of witnesses, including expert
witnesses, or by the production of documents, exhibits, or other evidence, or (of course) by a combination of the two. Further,
there are some propositions that are so obvious that proof is not required. 77

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
(iv) Standard of proof
6. 83
The degree of proof that must be achieved in practice before an international arbitral tribunal is not capable of precise
definition, but it is generally based on the ‘balance of probability’ standard (that is, ‘more likely than not’). This standard is
to be distinguished from the concept of ‘beyond all reasonable doubt’ required, for example, in countries such as the United
States and England to prove guilt in a criminal trial before a jury. 78
6. 84
The practice of arbitral tribunals in international arbitrations is to assess the weight to be given to the evidence presented in
favour of any particular proposition by reference to the nature of the proposition to be proved. For example, if the weather at
a particular airport on a particular day is an important element in the factual matrix, it is probably sufficient to produce a copy
of a contemporary report from a reputable newspaper, rather than to engage a meteorological expert to advise the tribunal.
6. 85
In general, the more startling the proposition that a party seeks to prove, the more rigorous the arbitral tribunal will be in
requiring that proposition to be fully established. A classic example of this general rule involves allegations of fraud or
illegality. Whilst the standard will remain the ‘balance of probabilities’, an arbitral tribunal is likely to look even more closely
at the evidence to determine whether such a standard has been adequately met. In the words of an English case heard in the
(then) House of Lords:
The civil standard of proof always means more likely than not. The only higher degree of probability required
by the law is the criminal standard. But, as Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead explained in In re H (Sexual Abuse,
Standard of Proof) (Minors) [1996] AC 563 at 586, some things are inherently more likely than others. It would
need more cogent evidence to satisfy one that the creature seen walking in Regent’s Park was more likely than
not to have been a lioness than to be satisfied to the same standard of probability that it was an Alsatian. In
this basis, cogent evidence is generally required to satisfy a civil tribunal that a person has been fraudulent or
behaved in some other reprehensible manner. But the question is always whether the tribunal thinks it more
probable than not. 79
6. 86
In deciding what evidence to produce and the means by which it should be presented, the practitioner should therefore make
an evaluation of the degree of proof that the tribunal is likely to require before being sufficiently satisfied to make the finding
of fact that his or her client is seeking.
(b) Categories of evidence
6. 87
The evidence presented to arbitral tribunals on disputed issues of fact may be divided into four categories:
 
(1)production of contemporaneous documents;
 
(2)testimony of witnesses of fact (written and/or oral);
 
(3)opinions of expert witnesses (written and/or oral); and
 
(4)inspection of the subject matter of the dispute.
These methods may be used, or combined, in many different ways for the purpose of discharging the burden of proof to the
standard required by an arbitral tribunal. It is important to recognise that each different arbitral tribunal may adopt a different

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
approach not only to the manner in which it wishes the evidence to be presented, but also to the weight that it is willing to
give to any particular type of evidence.
6. 88
Modern international arbitral tribunals accord greater weight to the contents of contemporary documents than to written and oral
testimony given, possibly years after the event, by witnesses who have obviously been ‘prepared’ by lawyers representing the
parties. In international arbitrations, the best evidence that can be presented in relation to any issue of fact is almost invariably
contained in the documents that came into existence at the time of the events giving rise to the dispute. 80
6. 89
Unsurprisingly, the evidence-gathering activity in international arbitrations usually takes place in the period after the facts in
dispute have been identified, through the written submissions delivered by the parties, and before the witness hearings begin.
(c) Documentary evidence
6. 90
The parties produce the documents on which they intend to rely at an early stage in an international arbitration. This will usually
be with their written submissions, which has the merit of placing the principal documents ‘on the table’ at the earliest practicable
moment.
6. 91
The story becomes more complicated in the context of documents that the parties have not chosen to produce voluntarily. The
phrase ‘culture clash’ is overused in the lexicon of modern arbitration, but it often seems appropriate in the context of document
production.
6. 92
It is thus not unusual for US lawyers to come to hearings in European (and other) prominent arbitration venues carrying with
them a belief in the entitlement to ‘discovery’ 81  of a certain document, or groups of documents. By contrast, in some civil law
countries, it may be professional malpractice for a lawyer to disclose such documents to the arbitral tribunal or to the opposing
party. 82  The result can be that a huge amount of time and expense is incurred in dealing with disputes concerning document
production.
(i) IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration
6. 93
In the late 1990s, building on experience gained from the (not particularly successful) Supplementary Rules Governing the
Presentation and Reception of Evidence in International Commercial Arbitration that it had adopted in 1983, the International
Bar Association (IBA) embarked on a project to produce a new more ‘internationalised’ version. This project led to the
1999 edition, entitled the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial Arbitration, which became
almost universally recognised as the international standard for an effective, pragmatic, and relatively economical document
production regime. Following a two-year review process that included a public consultation, a substantially revised version
of the Rules (now titled the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration 83  and herein simply ‘the IBA
Rules’) was adopted by the IBA Council on 29 May 2010. The 2010 edition enjoyed wide acceptance such that, in 2019,
the IBA created a task force charged with revising the 2010 edition. Given the general satisfaction with the 2010 edition,
the task force proposed only modest revisions to the 2010 edition and, on 15 February 2021, the 2020 edition was formally
issued. The remainder of this section of the current chapter is therefore presented by reference to the principles and provisions
contained in the 2020 edition. 84
6. 94

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Article 3 of the IBA Rules deals with document production. Its main provisions are as follows:
1. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, each Party shall submit to the Arbitral Tribunal and
to the other Parties all Documents available to it on which it relies, including public Documents and those
in the public domain, except for any Documents that have already been submitted by another Party.
2. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, any Party may submit to the Arbitral Tribunal and to
the other Parties a Request to Produce.
3. A Request to Produce shall contain:
 
(a) 
 
(i) a description of each requested Document sufficient to identify it, or
 
(ii) a description in sufficient detail (including subject matter) of a narrow and
specific requested category of Documents that are reasonably believed to exist;
in the case of Documents maintained in electronic form, the requesting Party
may, or the Arbitral Tribunal may order that it shall be required to, identify
specific files, search terms, individuals or other means of searching for such
Documents in an efficient and economical manner;
 
(b) a statement as to how the Documents requested are relevant to the case and material to its
outcome; and
 
(c)
 
(i) a statement that the Documents requested are not in the possession, custody or
control of the requesting Party or a statement of the reasons why it would be
unreasonably burdensome for the requesting Party to produce such Documents,
and
 
(ii) a statement of the reasons why the requesting Party assumes the Documents
requested are in the possession, custody or control of another Party.
4. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, the Party to whom the Request to Produce is addressed
shall produce to the other Parties and, if the Arbitral Tribunal so orders, to it, all the Documents requested
in its possession, custody or control as to which it makes no objection.
[ … ]
6. 95
These provisions are admirably clear and self-explanatory. They establish the principle, referred to earlier, that the parties
should produce the evidentiary documents on which they rely as the first stage. They make provision for requests by each
party to the other(s) for further documents, with appropriate limitations. The most significant limitation is in the expression
‘relevant to the case and material to its outcome’ in Article 3.3.b, which is considered further later in this chapter. 85
6. 96
Most legal practitioners are accustomed to the obligation to satisfy a court, or arbitral tribunal, as to the question of relevance
of documents or other information that they are seeking from the opposing party. But the requirement of showing ‘materiality’
to the outcome of the case is an increased burden. It also enables arbitral tribunals to deny document requests where, although
the requested documents would generally be relevant, they consider that their production will not affect the outcome of the
proceedings.
6. 97

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
Dealing with disputed document production requests can be a laborious and time-consuming process for all concerned, and
different arbitral tribunals adopt various techniques to cut through the detail involved in resolving such disputed requests.
Article 3 of the IBA Rules (to continue the extract set out above), contains the following relevant provisions:
[ … ]
5. If the Party to whom the Request to Produce is addressed has an objection to some or all of the
Documents requested, it shall state the objection in writing to the Arbitral Tribunal and the other Parties
within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal. The reasons for such objection shall be any of those set
forth in Article 9.2 86  or a failure to satisfy any of the requirements of Article 3.3.
6. Upon receipt of any such objection, the Arbitral Tribunal may invite the relevant Parties to consult with
each other with a view to resolving the objection.
7. Either Party may, within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, request the Arbitral Tribunal to rule
on the objection. The Arbitral Tribunal shall then, in consultation with the Parties and in timely fashion,
consider the Request to Produce and the objection. The Arbitral Tribunal may order the Party to whom
such Request is addressed to produce any requested Document in its possession, custody or control as to
which the Arbitral Tribunal determines that (i) the issues that the requesting Party wishes to prove are
relevant to the case and material to its outcome; (ii) none of the reasons for objection set forth in Article
9.2 applies; and (iii) the requirements of Article 3.3 have been satisfied. Any such Document shall be
produced to the other Parties and, if the Arbitral Tribunal so orders, to it.
[ … ]
(ii) The Redfern Schedule
6. 98
The IBA Rules, as we have seen, suggest (at Article 3.6) that faced with an objection to a request for production of documents,
the arbitral tribunal should ask the parties to try to settle their differences before asking the tribunal itself to intervene.
In practice, the parties’ counsel will almost certainly have been engaged, often for weeks or months, in discussions and
correspondence about their respective Requests for Production of Documents, before any reference is made to the tribunal.
Requests for production have become a prominent part of the evidentiary process in international arbitration, with each party
hoping to find documents in the control or possession of the opposing party that will either help the requesting party’s case
or damage that of its opponent. There may be no ‘smoking gun’, but there may still be documents (internal memoranda, for
example) that throw a different light on the case from that shown by the documents or witness statements previously put
forward by the party that is now trying to resist disclosure.
6. 99
In consequence, the search for such documents is often a protracted process, with lengthy exchanges between counsel in their
respective requests for production of documents by their opponents. During the course of these exchanges, some requests
may have been agreed in whole or in part, others may have been modified or withdrawn, others still may have been added
to the list, as fresh information emerged as to the type of documentary information potentially available. Only when a final
impasse has been reached, with each party feeling that it has gone as far as it reasonably can in complying with the requests
for production, will a reference to the tribunal become necessary.
6. 100
It is at this stage that the Redfern Schedule is likely to come into play. The schedule was designed in the year 2000, 87  as
a convenient tool for addressing disputed requests for the production of documents in an ongoing international arbitration.
Counsel for the parties, three major oil companies, had spent several months in correspondence and discussions about their
respective requests for production of documents, with the picture changing constantly as some requests were met, others
were withdrawn, and others still were added to each party’s lists. Finally, when the parties’ counsel had done all they could

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
to reach agreement, the arbitral tribunal was given an agreed bundle of emails and memoranda, and asked to rule on the
remaining disputed requests.
6. 101
The first problem for the arbitral tribunal was to find out from the ebb and flow of the communications between the parties,
what precisely were the requests on which it was expected to make a ruling? It would take considerable time for the tribunal
itself to do this. Accordingly, it was proposed that each requesting party should draw up a schedule showing in the first
column what documents it wanted to see, which it believed were in the possession or control of the other party; and in the
second column, why it thought that these documents were relevant to the case and material to its outcome. This schedule
would then be passed to the opposing party’s counsel who would complete a third column, stating why there was an objection
to production of the documents requested—for instance, because they were not considered to be relevant, or because they
could not be found, or because they were protected by legal professional privilege—and so forth. Then and only then would
the schedule be forwarded to the tribunal for its decision on the disputed requests.
6. 102
The purpose of the Redfern Schedule, then, is to crystallise the precise issues in dispute in relation to the production of
documents so that the arbitral tribunal knows the position that the parties have reached following the various exchanges
between them. 88  This makes it possible for the arbitral tribunal to make an informed decision as to whether or not a particular
document, or class of documents, should be produced, without becoming involved in the details of the exchanges between
the parties’ lawyers.
6. 103
To achieve this purpose, a schedule with at least four columns is drawn up. Each column of the schedule is intended to be
completed as briefly as possible by the parties’ lawyers.
 
• In the first column, the ‘requesting party’ sets out (a) a brief description of the requested document in sufficient detail
to identify it, or (b) a description in sufficient detail to identify a narrow and specific category of documents that are
reasonably believed to exist.
 
• In the second column, the requesting party states why the requested document(s) are both relevant to the case and
material to its outcome, as well as the statements required by Article 3.3.c.i and ii of the IBA Rules.
 
• In the third column, the requested party states the extent to which, if at all, it is prepared to accede to the request, and
if it objects, the grounds on which it does so. 89
 
• The fourth column is left blank for the arbitral tribunal’s decision.
Although this organisation of the Redfern Schedule remains common, it is not set in stone, and some tribunals request the
parties to organise the schedule so that the columns referenced above are presented instead as rows. 90
6. 104
In most cases, the arbitral tribunal should be able to make a decision on the disputed requests on the basis of the information
set out in the schedule. However, if the tribunal considers that the schedule as it stands does not contain sufficient information
for it to make a properly informed decision, it will either (a) call for additional information, or (b) hold a procedural hearing
with the parties’ counsel (perhaps a ‘case review conference’) to explore, for instance, the validity of an objection on the
grounds of legal professional privilege or to discuss some of the disputed claims in more detail. Once the tribunal has made
its decisions on all of the disputed requests, the documentary disclosure phase of the arbitration should be over.
6. 105
It is apparent from what has been said above that, as with much else in an international arbitration, the process depends for
its proper and fair operation on the integrity of counsel for the parties. But if, for instance, a witness at a hearing referred
to documents that had previously been said to have been destroyed, the tribunal would need a very good explanation from
counsel before drawing an inference adverse both to that counsel and to the party they represented. 91

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
(iii) The Prague Rules
6. 106
Before turning to other issues concerning documentary evidence, it is worth noting the ‘Rules on the Efficient Conduct
of Proceedings in International Arbitration’ (or the ‘Prague Rules’), which were developed because of a concern that
international arbitration was being ‘Americanised’ and that there was a common law bias in the IBA Rules. 92  The Prague
Rules are put forward as an attempt to give a more ‘civil law’ flavour to international arbitral procedure. They attempt to do
so, amongst other things, by encouraging arbitral tribunals to play a more proactive role in establishing the facts of the case,
and by encouraging the parties to ‘avoid any form of document production [requests], including e-discovery’. 93  However,
the Prague Rules do allow for document production requests if the requesting party satisfies the arbitral tribunal at the outset
of the proceedings that ‘document production may be needed’, 94  and it is not yet apparent at the time of writing whether the
Prague Rules are having a significant effect in reducing document production requests in many international arbitrations.
(iv) Production of electronic documents
6. 107
International arbitral tribunals generally place more reliance on contemporary documentary evidence than on witness
statements written years later for the purpose of the arbitration, which often betray a distinct harmony of views. It is therefore
not surprising that there has been much discussion concerning the ways in which electronically stored documents may, or
should, be used in international arbitration.
6. 108
If we take as the starting point what happens in civil law countries, it is probably broadly correct to say that there is generally
no obligation on the parties to produce documents other than those on which they rely (unless, exceptionally, the judge orders
a party to produce documents as part of his or her investigation of the facts). It follows that, in many civil law systems, the
existence of many hundreds of thousands of pages of electronically stored documents relating to a transaction does not give
rise to practical problems.
6. 109
However, in many common law countries, the rules of procedure in the law courts place an obligation on the parties to
disclose all documents ‘relevant’ to the issues in dispute. The sheer scale of complying with this obligation may place an
intolerable burden in terms of cost and effort not only on the producing party, but also on the opposing party, and on the
judges who have to make the findings of fact on which their judgments are based. For proceedings in the common law courts,
a partial solution to this problem was developed in the form of the so-called Sedona Principles, 95  which are aimed primarily
at limiting to a reasonable level the extent of the resources that parties may be obliged to expend in identifying documents
that might be required to be disclosed in litigation.
6. 110
Techniques to limit the burden of searching for relevant documents making use of artificial intelligence are now frequently
relied upon by lawyers. For example, several electronic discovery software products offer technology that can be used to
segregate for lawyers’ review information that is likely to be relevant from that which is likely to be irrelevant. 96  Similarly,
‘Technology-Assisted Review’ or predictive coding, in which ‘a computer learns to distinguish relevant from non-relevant
documents based on the coding [that is, relevancy decisions] of human reviewers and can then classify unlabeled documents
on its own’ 97  is widely available. It is likely that the use of such techniques will become commonplace in international
arbitrations.
6. 111

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
As stated earlier in this chapter, 98  rules of court do not apply in international arbitrations unless either the parties agree to
adopt them or, exceptionally, the arbitral tribunal should for some reason seek to impose them by a procedural direction. 99  It
follows that, absent agreement of the parties, the basis for production of documents is in the discretion of the arbitral tribunal.
6. 112
It is therefore appropriate to assess the question of electronic production against the background of the current version of the
IBA Rules, by which many tribunals will today be guided in the exercise of their discretion. First, the IBA Rules define the
term ‘document’ as ‘a writing, communication, picture, drawing, program or data of any kind, whether recorded or maintained
on paper or by electronic, audio, visual or any other means’. 100
6. 113
In the context of production of documents pursuant to Article 3 of the IBA Rules, it seems clear that there is no difference
in principle between ‘hard copy’ documents and ‘soft copy’ documents. It follows that the same general criteria should
apply to the approach by arbitral tribunals to resolving disputes between the parties as to whether or not they should
order the production of requested documents. The most important of these are ‘unreasonable burden’, ‘proportionality’, and
‘considerations of procedural economy, fairness or equality’. To a certain extent, these elements are intertwined. It is for the
arbitral tribunal to weigh the ‘materiality to the outcome’ against ‘proportionality’ (including the cost and burden involved
in complying with the contemplated procedural order). 101
(v) Documents in the possession of third parties
6. 114
An arbitral tribunal lacks power to order production of documents in the possession of a third party even where such
documents may be relevant to the matters in issue. However, in some countries, a third party may be compelled by subpoena
to attend at the hearings to give evidence and the courts can assist the arbitral tribunal in enforcing the attendance of such
witnesses. In England, a party may apply to a court to compel the attendance of a witness who is within the jurisdiction of
the court and to bring with him or her any material documents in his or her possession. 102  Similarly in the United States,
the Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 (FAA) provides that the arbitrators may summon a person to attend before them and
to produce any material documents. 103  However, following the US Supreme Court’s decision in ZF Automotive US, Inc. v
Luxshare, Ltd. and AlixPartners LLP v Fund for Protection Investors’ Rights in Foreign States, it will—in most circumstances
—no longer be possible to obtain discovery from third parties in the United States in support of foreign arbitration proceedings
pursuant to section 1782 of Title 28 of the US Code.
6. 115
It sometimes happens in arbitration proceedings that a third party appears voluntarily at the request of one of the parties
to provide testimony helpful to that party. On questioning by the other party’s counsel, the witness may then object to the
production of requested documents. While the arbitral tribunal may not have the power to order such a third party to produce
documents, it may draw an adverse inference in respect of the evidence of the witness in question if it appears to the tribunal
that the witness is withholding documents without good reason.
(vi) Adverse inferences
6. 116
A technique followed by arbitral tribunals coming from different systems and cultures is to draw an ‘adverse inference’ from
the silence of a party, or failure to comply with an order of the arbitral tribunal for the production of documentary or witness
evidence. 104  This is covered in Article 9.6 and 9.7 of the IBA Rules, which state:
6. If a Party fails without satisfactory explanation to produce any Document requested in a Request to
Produce to which it has not objected in due time or fails to produce any Document ordered to be produced

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
by the Arbitral Tribunal, the Arbitral Tribunal may infer that such document would be adverse to the
interests of that Party.
7. If a Party fails without satisfactory explanation to make available any other relevant evidence, including
testimony, sought by one Party to which the Party to whom the request was addressed has not objected
in due time or fails to make available any evidence, including testimony, ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal
to be produced, the Arbitral Tribunal may infer that such evidence would be adverse to the interests of
that Party.
6. 117
In this way, two important limitations apply where the IBA Rules are applicable. The first is that there must have been an
order of the arbitral tribunal for production of the documents or other testimony concerned; the second is that the requested
party must have failed to provide a ‘satisfactory explanation’ for not having produced the material in question. 105  Whether
or not an explanation to the effect that the material ‘does not exist’ or ‘no longer exists’ is satisfactory is a matter for the
arbitral tribunal to decide after taking all of the relevant circumstances into consideration.
6. 118
For example, if a document had been destroyed before the dispute arose, pursuant to a well-established (and reasonable)
corporate document retention policy, many arbitral tribunals would consider such an explanation to be reasonable. However,
if a document had been destroyed soon after a new document retention policy had been implemented, particularly if the policy
was devised after the dispute arose, it would not be surprising if the tribunal were to take a sceptical view of the explanation.
(vii) Presentation of documents
6. 119
It is of considerable assistance to the arbitral tribunal if the parties are able to present the documentary evidence in the form
of a volume (or volumes) of documents, in chronological order, with each page numbered like those of a book, for use at
the hearing. In this way, each member of the arbitral tribunal, and each party, has a complete set of documents with identical
numbering. If there is a huge number of documents, it may be sensible to identify the most important documents and to
include them in a separate volume or volumes (sometimes known as a ‘core bundle’).
6. 120
It is increasingly common for arbitral tribunals to request the parties to prepare hyperlinked versions of their written
submissions, and hyperlinked indices of the fact evidence and legal authorities placed in the record by the parties. Such
hyperlinked documents allow the tribunal members to navigate easily between documents at the hearing, and often prove
useful to the arbitral tribunal while it is writing its award. 106  Arbitral tribunals and parties may also find utility in arranging
for an ‘electronic hearing bundle’ which is an organised collection of the electronic documents sought to be relied upon at
the hearing. There now exist several document-sharing platforms that support electronic bundles. 107
6. 121
The use of the word ‘agreed’ in the context of volumes of documents occasionally gives rise to misunderstanding. The word
is not intended to indicate that the parties are agreed on the meaning of the contents of the document, or its evidentiary weight,
or even its admissibility. It simply indicates that the authenticity of the document is ‘agreed’ in the sense that each party
agrees that it is an accurate copy of an existing document.
6. 122
When the authenticity of documents is disputed, the arbitral tribunal usually orders that the originals (or certified copies, when
appropriate) must be produced for inspection. 108  This may be carried out by forensic experts, if necessary. If the originals
are not produced, the arbitral tribunal may disregard the documents in question as unreliable.

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
(viii) Translations
6. 123
It is usually necessary to provide translations of any documents that are not already in the language of the arbitration. Such
translations should, if possible, be submitted to the arbitral tribunal jointly by the parties as ‘agreed translations’. The most
convenient practice is to include the document in its original language first, immediately following it in the volume with the
translation (of the relevant extract if the document is lengthy) into the language of the arbitration. 109  If the correctness of
the translation is disputed, each party’s version may be inserted following the original and the tribunal may involve an expert
translator of its own to resolve such a dispute.
(d) Fact witness evidence
6. 124
The role of fact witnesses is to explain or supplement the evidentiary documents, so as to help the arbitral tribunal to perform its
fact-finding function. In commercial transactions, as compared with accident cases, for example, most of the witnesses are likely
to have had some connection with the transaction on one side or the other. They therefore tend to have a direct or indirect interest
in the outcome of the case. 110  It is perhaps not surprising that most arbitral tribunals regard the testimony of fact witnesses as
generally less reliable than the contemporaneous documents, brought into existence at the time of the events that gave rise to
the dispute, particularly when their written witness statements bear a striking resemblance to each other.
6. 125
Article 4 of the IBA Rules deals with the presentation of fact witness evidence. It provides, in part, as follows:
1. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, each Party shall identify the witnesses on whose testimony
it intends to rely and the subject matter of that testimony.
2. Any person may present evidence as a witness, including a Party or a Party’s officer, employee or other
representative.
3. It shall not be improper for a Party, its officers, employees, legal advisors or other representatives to
interview its witnesses or potential witnesses and to discuss their prospective testimony with them.
4. The Arbitral Tribunal may order each Party to submit within a specified time to the Arbitral Tribunal and to
the other Parties Witness Statements by each witness on whose testimony it intends to rely, except for those
witnesses whose testimony is sought pursuant to Articles 4.9 or 4.10. If Evidentiary Hearings are organised
into separate issues or phases (such as jursidiction, preliminary determinations, liability or damages), the
Arbitral Tribunal or the Parties by agreement may schedule the submission of Witness Statements separately
for each issue or phase.
5. Each Witness Statement shall contain:
 
(a) the full name and address of the witness, a statement regarding his or her present and past
relationship (if any) with any of the Parties, and a description of his or her background,
qualifications, training and experience, if such a description may be relevant to the dispute or
to the contents of the statement;
 
(b) a full and detailed description of the facts, and the source of the witness’s information as to
those facts, sufficient to serve as that witness’s evidence in the matter in dispute. Documents
on which the witness relies that have not already been submitted shall be provided;

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
 
(c) a statement as to the language in which the Witness Statement was originally prepared and the
language in which the witness anticipates giving testimony at the Evidentiary Hearing;
 
(d) an affirmation of the truth of the Witness Statement; and
 
(e) the signature of the witness and its date and place.
[ … ]
7. If a witness whose appearance has been requested pursuant to Article 8.1 fails without a valid reason to
appear for testimony at an Evidentiary Hearing, the Arbitral Tribunal shall disregard any Witness Statement
related to that Evidentiary Hearing by that witness unless, in exceptional circumstances, the Arbitral Tribunal
decides otherwise.
8. If the appearance of a witness has not been requested pursuant to Article 8.1, none of the other Parties
shall be deemed to have agreed to the correctness of the content of the Witness Statement. 111
[ … ]
In effect, this scheme codifies the procedures that have been developed by international arbitrators and arbitral institutions over
the years, 112  during which it has gradually become common practice to present the direct testimony of fact witnesses in writing
in advance of the witness hearing.
(i) Presentation of witness evidence
6. 126
The IBA Rules requires each party to indicate to the arbitral tribunal which of the other party’s witnesses should be required
to attend the hearing for oral examination, and the arbitral tribunal may itself indicates to the parties which, if any, of the
other witnesses it wishes to hear in person. 113  The 2020 IBA Rules have introduced a new provision which makes clear
that even if the parties agree that a witness statement shall serve as that witness’s direct testimony, the arbitral tribunal ‘may
nevertheless permit further oral direct testimony’. 114  This new provision allows a witness to give oral evidence even when
not called for cross-examination by the other party. Although it is relatively rare for the arbitral tribunal to require a witness
to be present if neither party requires that witness to attend, the arbitral tribunal has the power to do so. 115
6. 127
The Prague Rules adopt a slightly different approach to the presentation of witnesses, and by default allow for the arbitral
tribunal to determine which of the witnesses it wishes to hear in person. Specifically, Article 5.2 of the Prague Rules provides:
‘The arbitral tribunal, after having heard the parties, will decide which witnesses are to be called for examination during
the hearing [ … ]’. 116
(ii) Preparation of witnesses
6. 128
An important aspect of the presentation of witness evidence is the question of whether, and if so, to what extent, it is
permissible for a party, its employees, or counsel to interview and prepare those witnesses whose testimony they intend
to present to the arbitral tribunal. This is largely a cultural matter, although the rules of some national courts (and/or bar
associations) forbid, or make it unethical for, parties or their counsel to contact witnesses before they give their testimony
in person. 117
6. 129

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
In international arbitration, it is well recognised that witnesses may be interviewed and prepared prior to giving their oral
testimony. 118  This is confirmed by at least three of the sets of institutional rules in common use. The LCIA Rules expressly
permit it, subject to any mandatory provisions of any law governing the arbitration, other rules of law, or an order of the
tribunal to the contrary, 119  and the Swiss Rules and the SIAC Rules also permit such contact. 120  Article 4.3 of the IBA
Rules also provides: ‘It shall not be improper for a Party, its officers, employees, legal advisors or other representatives
to interview its witnesses or potential witnesses and to discuss their prospective testimony with them.’ 121  However, it is
generally accepted that there are certain limits. It would be professional misconduct if a lawyer were to try to persuade a fact
witness to tell a story that both the lawyer and the witness know to be untrue, and to prepare the witness to make such a story
sound as credible as possible. 122  It would also almost always be counterproductive. Experienced arbitral tribunals tend to
have good ‘noses’ for sniffing out inaccuracies in stories told by witnesses, and invariably cross-check oral testimony against
the available corroborative documentary and other evidence.
(iii) Parties as witnesses
6. 130
Another cultural division arises between lawyers from jurisdictions in which a party is not allowed to be called as a ‘witness’.
This stems from the rules of court in some civil law countries under which a person (or officer, or employee, in the case of
corporate entities) cannot be treated as a witness in his or her own cause. 123  However, even in the courts of these countries,
a party can be heard; the rule merely forbids him or her from being categorised as a ‘witness’.
6. 131
As in the case of other rules of national court procedure, this rule does not apply in international arbitrations, 124  unless the
parties have expressly agreed that such rules should be applied. It may be that an arbitral tribunal will tend to give greater
weight to the testimony of a witness who has no financial or other interest in the outcome of the arbitration, but that is a
different question. 125
(iv) Admissibility and weight of witness evidence
6. 132
The rules concerning admissibility of witness testimony are, in principle, the same for written testimony as those that are
applied to witnesses when they are giving oral testimony at a hearing before the arbitral tribunal. 126  In practice, it is rare
for an arbitral tribunal to order written witness testimony to be withdrawn as inadmissible; rather, an arbitral tribunal is far
more likely to address such issues as a matter of the evidentiary weight to be accorded the contents of the witness evidence
concerned.
6. 133
An arbitral tribunal has discretion to determine the evidentiary weight to be given to witness evidence. 127  This arises from
the general principles applicable to arbitration proceedings and is expressly affirmed, for example, in Article 27.4 of the
UNCITRAL Rules. 128
6. 134
In general, arbitral tribunals tend to give less weight to uncorroborated witness testimony than to evidence contained in
contemporaneous documents. This is not altogether surprising given recent scientific studies on the fallibility of human
memory. For example, a recent ICC Report on the ‘Accuracy of Fact Witness Memory in International Arbitration’ notes
that ‘[s] cientific studies and human experience show that witness memory is imperfect and is subject to possible distorting
influences as soon as it is formed’. 129  Mr Justice Legatt has similarly observed that ‘[a]n obvious difficulty which affects
allegations and oral evidence based on recollection of events which occurred several years ago is the unreliability of human
memory’, and that ‘the best approach for a judge to adopt in the trial of a commercial case is, in my view, to place little
if any reliance at all on a witness’s recollections of what was said in meetings and conversations’. 130  He has added that

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
‘[t]his does not mean that oral testimony serves no useful purpose [ … ] its value lies, as I see it, in the opportunity which
cross-examination affords to subject the documentary record to critical scrutiny and to gauge the personality, motivations and
working practices of a witness, rather than in testimony of what the witness recalls of particular conversations and events’. 131
Legatt’s observations are likely to be shared by many international arbitrators, and that is no doubt why arbitral tribunals give
greater weight to the evidence of a witness that has been tested by cross-examination, or by an examination by the arbitral
tribunal itself. Arbitral tribunals usually reject any submission that they should not hear the evidence of any particular witness,
even if it is secondary or ‘hearsay’ evidence. However, an arbitral tribunal will give less weight to secondary evidence if,
in its opinion, the party calling that evidence could have produced a witness who would have been able to give direct first-
hand evidence on the factual issue in question.
(v) Taking evidence outside the seat
6. 135
Problems arise when an arbitral tribunal wishes to obtain evidence from outside of the jurisdiction in which the arbitration
takes place. In most countries, arbitrators do not have subpoena powers and thus have to request the assistance of courts if
they want to compel the attendance of third-party witnesses, or to compel the production of documents in the possession of
third parties, whether they are located within the seat of the arbitration or beyond.
6. 136
The 1970 Hague Convention streamlines procedures for obtaining evidence in response to a request for assistance from
‘judicial authorities’—but an arbitral tribunal is not a judicial authority. Accordingly, a request made from an arbitral tribunal
does not fall within the scope of the 1970 Hague Convention. Nonetheless, many of the signatory states to the Hague
Convention lend their judicial assistance to an arbitral tribunal with its juridical seat in another contracting state, or have
otherwise enacted legislation that permits courts to provide assistance to foreign tribunals. 132  In the United States, courts
have the power under section 1782 of Title 28 of the US Code to order non-parties within their jurisdiction to give testimony
or to produce documents for use in proceedings ‘in a foreign or international tribunal’ at the request of the tribunal or ‘any
interested person’. 133  From the mid-2000s onwards, parties increasingly sought to rely on this power to secure expansive
forms of discovery in aid of foreign arbitrations. 134  However, in June 2022, the US Supreme Court put an end to this—at
least for international commercial arbitration—holding that section 1782 applies only to foreign or international tribunals
that are governmental or intergovernmental, rather than also encompassing ‘[p]rivate adjudicatory bodies’. 135
6. 137
The Model Law also deals with court assistance in the production of evidence. 136  However, it was determined that questions
of international cooperation in the taking of evidence should not be governed by a model law, but through bilateral or
multilateral conventions. Thus, it is restricted to obtaining evidence where both the state in which the arbitration takes place
and the state in which the evidence is located are signatories of the Model Law. In the light of inherent limitations, the most
common way of compelling the production of evidence in arbitration is indirectly, by means of the ability of arbitrators to
draw adverse inferences from unexcused failure to produce the requested evidence. 137
(e) Experts
(i) Role of experts in international arbitration
6. 138
We have already discussed the presentation of evidence to a tribunal, first by means of the production of contemporaneous
documents, and secondly, by means of the testimony of witnesses of fact. The third method of presenting evidence to an
arbitral tribunal is by the use of expert witnesses. Some issues can be determined only by the arbitral tribunal deciding on

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
differences that are essentially matters of opinion. Thus in a construction dispute, the contemporary documents (comprising
correspondence, progress reports, site diaries, and other memoranda), together with the evidence of witnesses who were
actually present on the site, should enable the arbitral tribunal to determine what actually happened. There may then be a
further question to be determined—namely, whether what actually happened was the result of, for example, a design error
or defective construction practices. The determination of such an issue can probably be made by the arbitral tribunal only
with the assistance of experts, unless the tribunal itself possesses the relevant expertise. Equally, in shipping arbitrations,
the performance of a vessel or its equipment may need to be evaluated by experts, so that the arbitral tribunal may make
the relevant findings of fact.
6. 139
There are two basic methods of proceeding where the arbitral tribunal itself does not have the relevant expertise. The first
is for the arbitral tribunal to appoint its own expert or experts. The second is for the parties to engage its own ‘independent’
experts to work on the case and to give expert evidence to the tribunal. Since this evidence is extremely likely to differ from
the evidence of the other side’s experts, it will be for the arbitral tribunal to evaluate it. This evaluation is usually carried
out after the evidence of each expert has been tested by cross-examination, leaving the tribunal to decide which expert or
experts it finds the most credible.
(ii) Experts appointed by the arbitral tribunal
6. 140
In international arbitration, the arbitral tribunal is usually composed of lawyers. 138  Where matters of a specialist or technical
nature arise, such an arbitral tribunal often needs expert assistance in reaching its conclusions, in order ‘to obtain any technical
information that might guide it in the search for the truth’. 139
6. 141
International arbitral tribunals have the power to appoint experts under most arbitration rules. 140  Although it is a well-
established principle of most national systems of law that someone to whom a duty has been delegated must not delegate that
duty to someone else, it is difficult to see any objection in principle to the appointment of an expert by an arbitral tribunal. 141
If an arbitral tribunal needs expert technical assistance in order to understand complex technical matters and it decides that
it is in need of expert assistance to understand these matters in order to arrive at a proper decision, there is no good reason
to prevent it from obtaining such assistance.
6. 142
If the tribunal decides to appoint its own expert, it will probably first ask the parties to try to agree upon a suitable candidate,
since they are more likely to know who are the best people for the job. If this doesn’t work, the tribunal may present the
parties with a list of individuals and institutions from which to choose, stating that if the parties are still unable to agree, the
tribunal will choose the expert itself.
6. 143
Similarly, the tribunal may seek input from the parties as to the expert’s terms of reference. Once the expert has prepared a
preliminary report, the parties will be given an opportunity to comment; and the expert is expected to take these comments
into account when finalising his or her report. In this way, the parties can assist the expert in making the report complete,
while being reassured that important aspects of the case are not being decided without their involvement. 142
(iii) Expert witnesses presented by the parties
6. 144
One of the least satisfactory features of modern international arbitrations is the prevailing practice of presenting conflicting
expert evidence of opinion on matters of great technical complexity. However well the advocates for the parties are able to

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
test evidence of expert opinion presented by the other side through cross-examination, ‘how can the jury judge between two
statements each founded upon an experience confessedly foreign in kind to their own?’ 143
6. 145
Although professional triers of fact should fare better than a jury, it is sometimes difficult for an arbitral tribunal to make a
reasoned judgment as between two conflicting professional opinions on complex technical matters. Nevertheless, this remains
by far the most common method of presenting expert evidence, regardless of where the arbitration takes place. 144
6. 146
The parties’ expert evidence is normally delivered initially in the form of written expert reports, usually at the same time as
any written statements of witnesses of fact, or shortly thereafter, but in any event well in advance of the hearing. 145
6. 147
Article 5.2 of the IBA Rules provides a useful summary of the expected contents of a party-appointed expert report: 146
2. The Expert Report shall contain:
 
(a) the full name and address of the Party-Appointed Expert, a statement regarding his or her
present and past relationship (if any) with any of the Parties, their legal advisors and the
Arbitral Tribunal, and a description of his or her background, qualifications, training and
experience;
 
(b) a description of the instructions pursuant to which he or she is providing his or her opinions
and conclusions;
 
(c) a statement of his or her independence from the Parties, their legal advisors and the Arbitral
Tribunal;
 
(d) a statement of the facts on which he or she is basing his or her expert opinions and
conclusions;
 
(e) his or her expert opinions and conclusions, including a description of the methods,
evidence and information used in arriving at the conclusions. Documents on which the Party-
Appointed Expert relies that have not already been submitted shall be provided;
 
(f) if the Expert Report has been translated, a statement as to the language in which it was
originally prepared, and the language in which the Party-Appointed Expert anticipates giving
testimony at the Evidentiary Hearing;
 
(g) an affirmation of his or her genuine belief in the opinions expressed in the Expert Report;
 
(h) the signature of the Party-Appointed Expert and its date and place; and
 
(i) if the Expert Report has been signed by more than one person, an attribution of the entirety
or specific parts of the Expert Report to each author.
6. 148
The tribunal may also direct that experts be bound by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators’ Protocol for the Use of Party-
Appointed Expert Witnesses in International Arbitration in preparing their opinions. The Chartered Institute’s protocol
‘expands upon the IBA Rules’ in that it gives ‘more detailed guidance as to what should (and should not) be in an expert’s
written opinion and it deals with independence and privilege’. 147
(iv) Admissibility of expert evidence
6. 149

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
Where expert evidence is introduced by the parties, the rules regarding the admissibility of expert evidence applied by arbitral
tribunals will be, in general, the same as those applied to other forms of evidence in the same arbitration. If the evidence
of technical opinion is conflicting (which is usually the case), the expert witnesses must be prepared to appear in person
before the arbitral tribunal for examination. Consistent with the approach to fact witnesses, the IBA Rules provide that party-
appointed experts need not appear for testimony at an evidentiary hearing unless they are requested to do so and that, in the
absence of any such request, the other parties shall not be deemed to have accepted the correctness of the expert’s report. 148
(v) Categories of expert evidence
6. 150
The evidence of experts is presented in relation to all kinds of matters of opinion. Engineers and scientists are frequently
called upon to present reports, and to give evidence, in relation to disputes in which the quality of building work or the
performance of plant and equipment is in issue. Accountants are called upon to give evidence as to the quantum of claims;
lawyers may sometimes be required to give evidence where provisions of a ‘foreign’ system of law have to be explained to
the arbitral tribunal. In addition, it is not unknown for handwriting experts, or other persons expert in the forensic examination
of documents, to be called upon where the authenticity of a document is in question.
(vi) Experts on ‘foreign’ law
6. 151
In the common law system, judges sitting in their national courts expect the substantive law of a foreign country to be ‘proved
as fact’ by expert evidence. This convenient fiction has worked satisfactorily for hundreds of years in the court system.
However, it takes only a brief moment of reflection to appreciate that the convenient fiction that ‘foreign law is fact’ does not
work in the context of an international arbitration. Imagine three French lawyer arbitrators, sitting in England, with French
avocats presenting arguments on the applicable French substantive law: any suggestion that English procedural law would
require the relevant ‘foreign’ French substantive law to be proved as ‘fact’ would surely be greeted with some hilarity.
6. 152
In practice, the international arbitration community has solved this dilemma in a pragmatic and efficient way. Nowadays,
in almost all international arbitrations, ‘law’ is treated as ‘law’. The relevant provisions of that law are then identified and
substantiated either in written submissions by counsel (or by a lawyer experienced in that law acting as co-counsel), or by
way of expert testimony in the form of an expert opinion by legal experts on the law in issue, with the possibility that those
experts may be called as witnesses to explain their reasoning and conclusions.
(f) Inspection of the subject matter of the dispute
6. 153
The fourth method of presenting evidence to an arbitral tribunal is for the arbitral tribunal itself to inspect the subject matter of
the dispute. This is usually a site inspection, and mainly arises in connection with construction contracts and disputes arising out
of the performance of process plant and so forth. However, it may also apply in other types of case, for example it is common
in commodity arbitrations for the arbitrator to inspect the cargo or consignment if the dispute concerns the quality of the goods
supplied. 149
6. 154
Article 7 of the IBA Rules provides that:
Subject to the provisions of Articles 9.2 and 9.3, the Arbitral Tribunal may, at the request of a Party or
on its own motion, inspect or require the inspection by a Tribunal-Appointed Expert or a Party-Appointed

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
18
Expert of any site, property, machinery or any other goods, samples, systems, processes or Documents, as
it deems appropriate. The Arbitral Tribunal shall, in consultation with the Parties, determine the timing and
arrangements for the inspection. The Parties and their representatives shall have the right to attend any such
inspection. 150
6. 155
Although this power exists, arbitral tribunals do not often use this opportunity to supplement the information and evidence
available to them, probably because the additional expense involved is likely to be substantial in relation to the benefit gained. It
is more common, in current practice, for models, photographs, drawings, or even films to be used to fulfil the purpose that would
have been served by a site inspection. For example, in an ICC arbitration, it was proposed to charter a helicopter to make a video
showing the terrain in which a road was constructed over a length of some 60 km. 151  And in public international law cases
between states, for example involving a boundary dispute, film and photographic evidence is often presented at hearings. 152
(i) Procedure for inspection
6. 156
An arbitral tribunal has broad discretion as to the manner in which it undertakes an inspection of the subject matter of the
dispute. Unless the parties specifically agree otherwise, the arbitral tribunal will normally be careful to ensure that the principle
of equality of treatment is strictly observed. In particular, the arbitral tribunal will not normally make a site inspection except
in the presence of representatives of both parties, and the arbitrators will not normally put questions directly concerning the
case to persons working on the site unless counsel for each of the parties also has the right to ask additional questions of
those persons.
6. 157
Occasionally, parties may agree that the arbitral tribunal should inspect a site, or the subject matter of the dispute, without
being accompanied at all. However, it would be inappropriate, and potentially dangerous when the award comes to be
enforced, if the arbitral tribunal were to make an inspection in the presence of one party alone. 153
6. 158
If a site inspection is to be made, it is good practice for the arbitral tribunal to issue a procedural direction in advance. Who
is to be present? Who will make the arrangements? Will questions and answers or any discussion be transcribed and form
part of the record? In general, it is suggested that best practice is to direct that there will be no transcript and that what is
said should not form part of the record. 154  Otherwise, much of the usefulness of the inspection may be lost as a result of the
inevitable delay and formality that accompanies the presence of a reporter.
(ii) Inspection under ad hoc and institutional rules of arbitration
6. 159
The UNCITRAL Rules and the ICC Rules are silent on the question of inspection of the subject matter of the dispute,
although the UNCITRAL Rules refer to the obligation of the parties to make available to any experts appointed by the arbitral
tribunal any relevant information for inspection. 155  The LCIA Rules, 156  the SIAC Rules, 157  CIETAC Rules, 158  the DIAC
Rules, 159  the AAA Rules, 160  and the WIPO Rules 161  make specific provision for any inspection or investigation that the
arbitral tribunal may require.
6. 160
The ICSID Rules contemplate that a site inspection may be necessary. They contain power for the arbitral tribunal to ‘order
a visit to any place connected with the dispute if the arbitral tribunal deems it necessary. 162

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
19
6. 161
The WIPO Rules also provide for experiments to be conducted, 163  and for the provision by the parties of ‘primers’ and
‘models’. 164
Footnotes
74
See the discussion of comparative arbitration practices in (1987) 3 ICCA Congress Series 98. The extent to which the
Iran–United States Claims Tribunal took an active role in obtaining evidence is described by Holtzmann, ‘Fact-finding
by the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal’, in Lillich (ed.) Fact-Finding before International Tribunals: Eleventh Sokol
Colloquium (Transnational, 1991), pp. 106–110.
75
Reymond, ‘Part 2: Common law and civil law procedures—Which is the more inquisitorial?’ (1989) 55 Arbitration
155, at 159.
76
Holtzmann, ‘Fact-finding by the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal’, in Lillich (ed.) Fact-Finding before International
Tribunals: Eleventh Sokol Colloquium (Transnational, 1991), pp. 118–119. See also Holtzmann, ‘Streamlining arbitral
proceedings: Some techniques of the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal’ (1995) 11 Arb Intl 39; Straus, ‘The practice
of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal in receiving evidence from parties and from experts’ (1986) 3 J Intl Arb 57. See also
IBA Rules, Art. 9.1.
77
One such proposition might be that the earth is an oblate spheroid, although members of the Flat Earth Society would
not agree.
78
In Parker (1926) 4 Rep Intl Arb Awards 25, at 39, the Mexican–US General Claims Commission held that, ‘when the
claimant has established a prima facie case and the respondent has offered no evidence in rebuttal the latter may not
insist that the former pile up evidence to establish its allegations beyond a reasonable doubt without pointing out some
reason for doubting’. See also Eveleigh, Hanotiau, Menzies, Philip, Redfern, Reiner, and Reymond, ‘The standards and
burden of proof in international arbitration’ (1994) 10 Arb Intl 317, at 320–321; Pietrowski, ‘Evidence in international
arbitration’ (2006) 22 Arb Intl 373.
79
Secretary of State for the Home Department v Rehman [2001] UKHL 47, at [140]–[141] per Lord Hoffmann. (There was
a time when there were lions and lionesses in the zoo at Regent’s Park, so the creature might then have been a lioness.)
See also Partasides, ‘Proving corruption in international arbitration: A balanced standard for the real world’ (2010)
25 ICSID Rev—Foreign Investment LJ 472.
80
In two cases before the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal, fact-finding on jurisdictional issues was based entirely
on documentary evidence consisting of official documents, corporate documents prepared in the ordinary course of
business, publications of which the Tribunal took judicial notice, certificates by independent certified public accountants,
and affidavits of corporate officers: see Holtzmann, ‘Fact-finding by the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal’, in Lillich
(ed.) Fact-Finding before International Tribunals: Eleventh Sokol Colloquium (Transnational, 1991), pp. 110–114.
81
The word ‘discovery’ is a term of art used in the United States and some other common law countries (no longer in
England, where the term was abolished under the Civil Procedure Rules 1996) to describe a process whereby the parties
(and their lawyers) are legally obliged to produce documents that are ‘relevant to the pleaded issues’, even if they are
prejudicial to that party’s case. Subject to any mandatory rules of the lex arbitri, or agreement of the parties, the process
known as ‘discovery’ has no place in international arbitration.
82
Other than where the applicable arbitration rules expressly permit such an order.
83
The deletion of the word ‘Commercial’ from their title was intended to reflect the fact that the Rules may be, and indeed
already are, applied in both commercial and investment treaty arbitration.
84
The Preamble to the Rules provides that:
They are designed to supplement the legal provisions and the institutional, ad hoc or other rules that apply
to the conduct of the arbitration [ … ] Parties and Arbitral Tribunals may adopt the IBA Rules of Evidence,
in whole or in part, to govern arbitration proceedings, or they may vary them or use them as guidelines
in developing their own procedures. The Rules are not intended to limit the flexibility that is inherent in,
and an advantage of, international arbitration, and Parties and Arbitral Tribunals are free to adapt them to
the particular circumstances of each arbitration. Article 1 of the Rules further includes various provisions

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
20
aimed at resolving conflicts between the Rules, mandatory provisions of law, and the institutional, ad hoc,
or other rules that apply to the conduct of the arbitration.
85
See paragraph 6.103. This formulation (introduced in the 2010 edition) was intended to be a clarification, rather than
a modification, of the criteria under the 1999 Rules, which required a document to be ‘relevant and material to the
outcome of the case’. The change of wording is not mentioned in the IBA Commentary on the 2010 Rules: Ashford, The
IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration: A Guide (Cambridge University Press, 2013), paras
P-5–P-38. See also Kläsener, ‘The duty of good faith in the 2010 IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Arbitration’ (2010) 13 Intl Arb LR 160.
86
Article 9.2 states:
The Arbitral Tribunal shall, at the request of a Party or on its own motion, exclude from evidence or
production any Document, statement, oral testimony or inspection for any of the following reasons:
 
(a)lack of sufficient relevance to the case or materiality to its outcome;
 
(b)legal impediment or privilege under the legal or ethical rules determined by the Arbitral Tribunal
to be applicable;
 
(c)unreasonable burden to produce the requested evidence;
 
(d)loss or destruction of the Document that has been shown with reasonable likelihood to have
occurred;
 
(e)grounds of commercial or technical confidentiality that the Arbitral Tribunal determines to be
compelling;
 
(f)grounds of special political or institutional sensitivity (including evidence that has been classified
as secret by a government or a public international institution) that the Arbitral Tribunal determines
to be compelling; or
 
(g)considerations of procedural economy, proportionality, fairness or equality of the Parties that the
Arbitral Tribunal determines to be compelling.
87
It was given its title, somewhat jocularly, by the presiding arbitrator in the international arbitration for which it was
devised. See ‘The Redfern Schedule’ in the ICCA Review of April 2013, ‘Efficiency in Arbitration’, pp. 9 and 12.
88
The requirement to present document requests in the form of a Redfern Schedule is usually set out in the first procedural
order, as part of the ‘ground rules’ for the arbitration: see the ICC Report on the ‘Effective Management of Arbitration’
mentioned below. The first report by the ICC Commission on the Redfern Schedule was published in November 2007
and entitled ‘Techniques for Controlling Time and Costs in Arbitration’; it suggested that one way of managing requests
for production of documents efficiently was by ‘using the Schedule of Document Production devised by Alan Redfern
and often referred to as the Redfern Schedule, in the form of a chart containing the following four columns’ (which were
then listed): see ICC Publication No. 843 at p. 32. In the later ICC Commission’s Report on ‘Effective Management
of Arbitration’, published in 2014, the advice was shortened to read: ‘Consider the ground rules to be adopted for
implementing document production, including the use of a Redfern Schedule and the setting of the shortest reasonable
time frames for production’: see ICC Publication No. 866 at p. 36.
89
As a further efficiency in the use of Redfern schedules, VV Veeder KC (who seems to have been the first arbitrator to
bring the Schedule into the public domain) proposed a set of ‘Veeder codes’, in the form of abbreviations of the reasons
for objection set out in IBA Rules, Art. 3.5, for use in the drafting of objections to documents requests made in Redfern
Schedules. For example, where the requested party objects on the grounds that the requested document is not material
to the outcome of the case (pursuant to Arts 3.3.b and 9.2.a), it would enter the code ‘M’ in the third column of the
Redfern Schedule; where the requested party objects on the basis that the request is excessively broad (pursuant to Art.
3.3.a.ii), it would enter the code ‘B’.
90
See, e.g., Global Telecom Holding S.A.E. v Canada, ICSID Case No. ARB/16/16, Procedural Order No. 1, 13 July 2017,
at [15.2], Annex B. This organisation of the Redfern Schedule is referred to as the ‘Stern format’.
91
See paragraph 6.116 below. See also Chapter 5.
92
Is it time for a change?, Prague Rules Website, 20 April 2017, available online at https://praguerules.com/news/is-it-
time-for-a-change-/; Prague Rules (Draft of 1 September 2018), Note from the Working Group.
93
Prague Rules, Arts 3 and 4.
94
Prague Rules, Art. 4.3. In such circumstances, ‘a party may request the arbitral tribunal to order another party to produce
a specific document which: a. is relevant and material to the outcome of the case; b. is not in the public domain; and c.
is in the possession of another party or within its power or control’. Prague Rules, Art. 4.5.

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
21
95
Best Practices, Recommendations and Principles for Addressing Electronic Document Production (3rd edn, 2018),
named after The Sedona Conference (held at the Sedona Hilton in the United States). The first edition of the Principles
published in 2004 clearly inspired the conclusions reached by the Cresswell Committee in England, whose report in turn
led to a Practice Direction under the English Civil Procedure Rules, Pt. 31, and, later, to an amendment of the FRCP. See
also Hedges, ‘Litigation lessons? US Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, The Sedona Principles, and Part 31 of the English
Civil Procedure Rules’, in Howell (ed.) Electronic Disclosure in International Arbitration (JurisNet, 2008), pp. 107–117.
96
EDRM, The Use of Artificial Intelligence in eDiscovery, February 2021, p. 5.
97
Ibid. at p. 4.
98
See paragraph 6.01.
99
Which would generally be inappropriate unless both parties come from the seat of the arbitration, in which case the
arbitration would not, in fact, be an international arbitration.
100
IBA Rules, Definitions. The Introduction to the Sedona Principles defines ESI as including:
email, web pages, word processing files, audio and video files, images, computer databases [ … ] including
but not limited to servers, desktops, laptops, cell phones, hard drives, flash drives, PDAs and MP3 players.
Technically, information is ‘electronic’ if it exists in a medium that can only be read through the use of
computers. Such media include cache memory, magnetic disks (such as computer hard drives or floppy
disks), optical disks (such as DVDs or CDs), and magnetic tapes.
As the definition of ‘Documents’ contained in the 1999 edition of the IBA Rules was sufficiently broad to encompass
most forms of ESI, it was decided that minor changes would be made in the 2010 edition to ensure that all known forms
of ESI evidence would be subject to the IBA Rules: 1999 IBA Working Party and 2010 IBA Rules of Evidence Review
Subcommittee, ‘Commentary on the Revised Text of the 2010 IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Arbitration’ (2011) 5(1) DRI 45, at 49.
101
In respect of the production of electronic documents, the power of the tribunal under IBA Rules, Art. 3.3.a.ii, to require
a requesting party to ‘identify specific files, search terms, individuals or other means of searching for such Documents
in an efficient and economical manner’ provides a way in which to reduce the burden imposed on a requested party.
See also Art. 3.12.b (a party need produce electronic documents only ‘in the form most convenient or economical to it
that is reasonably usable by the recipients’) and c. (a party is not required to produce ‘multiple copies of Documents
which are essentially identical’). See also Smit, ‘E-disclosure under the Revised IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence
in International Arbitration’ (2010) 13 Intl Arb L Rev 201.
102
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 43.
103
US FAA, § 7.
104
The Iran–United States Claims Tribunal drew adverse inferences from the silence of a party in the face of alleged
breach or non-performance of the contract when some complaint would have been expected, and from failure of a
party to mention a point in a contract or in contemporaneous correspondence consistent with that party’s position in the
arbitration: Holtzmann, ‘Fact-finding by the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal’, in Lillich (ed.) Fact-Finding before
International Tribunals: Eleventh Sokol Colloquium (Transnational, 1991), pp. 126–127.
105
The Prague Rules, too, address the issue of adverse inferences. Article 10 of the Prague Rules provides that ‘[i]f a party
does not comply with the arbitral tribunal’s order(s) or instruction(s), without justifiable grounds, the arbitral tribunal
may draw, where it considers appropriate, an adverse inference with regard to such party’s respective case or issue’.
Thus the same limitations to an arbitral tribunal’s power to draw an adverse inference that exist under the IBA Rules,
also apply when the Prague Rules are applicable.
106
Such documents should ordinarily be ‘readable’ (that is, be the subject of optical character recognition) so that users
can search for particular words or phrases in the document.
107
See ICC Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration,
para. 107.
108
IBA Rules, Art. 3.12.a.
109
IBA Rules, Art. 3.12.d.
110
Although this does not mean that fact witnesses are inclined deliberately to misrepresent facts to an arbitral tribunal, it
is worth noting that studies have shown that ‘taking a particular perspective after an event is encoded into memory can
bias later recall of that event towards the biased perspective.’ ICC Commission Report: The Accuracy of Fact Witness
Memory in International Arbitration, p. 38.
111
This provision and Art. 8.1 are intended to save on time and expense by requiring witnesses to attend only where they
are requested to do so, and by providing that a witness statement is not deemed to be accepted by the other parties in
the absence of any such request (whether by agreement or otherwise): 1999 IBA Working Party and 2010 IBA Rules

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
22
of Evidence Review Subcommittee, ‘Commentary on the Revised Text of the 2010 IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence
in International Arbitration’ (2011) 5(1) DRI 45, at 64–66; Ashford, The IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in
International Arbitration: A Guide (Cambridge University Press, 2013), paras 4-13–4-14.
112
See, e.g., LCIA Rules, Art. 20; SIAC Rules, r. 25.
113
Article 8.3 provides that the right to call witnesses is subject to the tribunal’s power to exclude any appearance that
it considers to be ‘irrelevant, immaterial, unreasonably burdensome, duplicative or otherwise covered by a reason for
objection set forth in Articles 9.2 or 9.3’.
114
IBA Rules, Art. 8.5.
115
See also IBA Rules, Arts 3.10 and 8.5.
116
Prague Rules, Art. 5.2.
117
See the paper presented by Doak Bishop at the 2012 ICCA Congress held in Singapore in the context of a panel discussion
on the merits of uniform ethical regulation of international arbitration. See also Bishop and Stevens, ‘The compelling
need for a code of ethics in international arbitration: Transparency, integrity and legitimacy’ (2011) 15 ICCA Congress
Series 391, at 394.
118
Blackaby, ‘Witness preparation: A key to effective advocacy in international arbitration’ (2010) 15 ICCA Congress
Series 118.
119
LCIA Rules, Art. 20.6.
120
Swiss Rules, Art. 27.3; SIAC Rules, r. 25.5.
121
The final phrase, ‘and to discuss their prospective testimony with them’, was introduced in the 2010 edition to clarify
‘that such an interview need not remain general, but may indeed relate to the subject-matter of the prospective testimony’:
1999 IBA Working Party and 2010 IBA Rules of Evidence Review Subcommittee, ‘Commentary on the Revised Text of
the 2010 IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration’ (2011) 5(1) DRI 45, at 63–64; Ashford, The
IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration: A Guide (Cambridge University Press, 2013), paras
4-7–4-8. See also the IBA Guidelines on Party Representation, Guideline 24, which similarly provides that: ‘A Party
Representative [ … ] may meet or interact with Witnesses and Experts in order to discuss and prepare their prospective
testimony.’ See also the UNCITRAL Notes, para. 90. However, in exercise of its discretion under IBA Rules, Art. 9.1,
a tribunal may take into account extensive interviewing and preparation in determining the weight that it will accord
to a witness’s evidence.
122
See the IBA Guidelines on Party Representation, Guidelines 26 and 27. See also LCIA Rules, Annex.
123
Germany is a significant example, followed by countries in which the code of civil procedure broadly follows the German
tradition, such as Austria and the Czech Republic. See also 1999 IBA Working Party, fn. 121, at 63.
124
IBA Rules, Art. 4.2.
125
1999 IBA Working Party, fn. 121, at 63.
126
See paragraphs 6.80–6.81.
127
IBA Rules, Art. 9.1. The practice of the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal concerning the weight to be given to
affidavits is discussed by Holtzmann, ‘Fact-finding by the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal’, in Lillich (ed.) Fact-
Finding before International Tribunals: Eleventh Sokol Colloquium (Transnational, 1991), pp. 113–114.
128
See also, e.g., LCIA Rules, Art. 22.1.vi; Swiss Rules, Art. 26.1; SCC Rules, Art. 31.1; HKIAC Rules, Art. 22.1.
129
ICC Commission Report, The Accuracy of Fact Witness Memory in International Arbitration: Current Issues and
Possible Solutions (2020), p. 7.
130
Gestmin v Credit Suisse [2013] EWHC 3560 (Comm).
131
Ibid.
132
For example, the English Arbitration Act 1996, at s. 44, permits English courts to provide assistance to foreign arbitral
tribunals, but s. 2(3) provides that the courts can refuse to do so if ‘the fact that the seat of the arbitration is outside
England and Wales or Northern Ireland, or that when designated or determined the seat is likely to be outside England
and Wales or Northern Ireland, makes it inappropriate to do so’.
133
28 USC § 1782.
134
This was particularly so after the US Supreme Court’s decision in Intel Corporation v Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. 542
US 241 (2004), in which it adopted an expansive view of the scope of § 1782, holding that the Court’s power extends
to ‘administrative and quasi judicial proceedings abroad’.
135
ZF Automotive US, Inc. v Luxshare, Ltd. and AlixPartners LLP v Fund for Protection Investors’ Rights in Foreign States
596 US ____ (2022), p. 11. See paragraphs 7.45ff for a fuller discussion of this issue.
136
Model Law, Art. 27.
137
IBA Rules, Art. 9.6 and 9.7.

Section E. - Collecting Evidence, UKBC-REDFERN 530638638 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
23
138
See Chapter 4, paragraphs 4.48 ff.
139
See Starrett Housing Corporation v Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran (1987) 16 Iran–US CTR 112, Award
No. 314-21-1, 14 August 1987, at [264], quoting the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland v Albania (Corfu Channel) [1949] ICJ Rep 4, at 20.
140
See, e.g., UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 29; ICC Rules, Art. 25.4; Swiss Rules, Art. 28; SCC Rules, Art. 34; ICDR Rules, Art.
28; SIAC Rules, r. 26; HKIAC Rules, Art. 25; LCIA Rules, Art. 21.
141
This principle was expressed by the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal in Starrett Housing, at [266]: ‘No matter how
well qualified an expert may be, however, it is fundamental that an arbitral tribunal cannot delegate to him the duty of
deciding the case.’ In applying this principle, the Tribunal cited earlier international tribunals and stated, at [273]: ‘[T]he
Tribunal adopts as its own the conclusions of the Expert on matters within his area of expertise when it is satisfied that
sufficient reasons have not been shown that the Expert’s view is contrary to the evidence, the governing law, or common
sense.’ See also the comment and cases cited at [271]–[272]. See also IBA Rules, Art. 6.7.
142
The IBA Rules provide for the involvement of the parties in the appointment of the expert, and also recommend that
the parties (or their experts) have an opportunity to comment on and question the expert’s report: see IBA Rules, Art.
6.1, 6.2, 6.5, and 6.6.
143
Learned Hand, ‘Historical and practical considerations regarding expert testimony’ (1901) 15 Harv L Rev 40, at 54–55.
144
A number of international arbitration rules provide for the use of party-appointed experts: see, e.g., UNCITRAL Rules,
Art. 27.2; LCIA Rules, Art. 20; Swiss Rules, Art. 25.1, 25.4, and 25.5; SCC Rules, Art. 33; SIAC Rules, r. 25; HKIAC
Rules, Art. 22.5.
145
IBA Rules, Art. 5.1. See also Ashford, The IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration: A Guide
(Cambridge University Press, 2013), para. 2-10.
146
The key amendments introduced in the 2010 edition of the Rules were the requirements to (a) include a description
of expert’s instructions, (b) provide a statement of independence, and (c) append copies of the documents on which
the experts relies, unless they are already on the record of the arbitration. The report must also now include statements
regarding translation and be signed with an affirmation of genuine belief in the opinions expressed (rather than an
affirmation of the truth of the report, as was required under the 1999 edition of the Rules). See also ibid., at paras 5-4–
5-27, and the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators (CIArb) Protocol for the Use of Party-Appointed Expert Witnesses in
International Arbitration.
147
CIArb, Protocol for the Use of Party-Appointment Expert Witnesses in International Arbitration (2007), Foreword.
148
IBA Rules, Art. 5.6.
149
Ashford, The IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration: A Guide (Cambridge University Press,
2013), para. 7-02.
150
See IBA Rules, Art. 6.3 and 6.5, subject to Art. 9.2 and 9.3. See also the ICDR Guidelines for Arbitrators Concerning
Exchanges of Information, para. 5.
151
In fact, the dispute was settled before this was done.
152
Regarding inspections, see Art. 66 of the 1978 ICJ Rules of Court (adopted on 14 April 1978 and entered into force
on 1 July 1978).
153
UNICTRAL Notes on Organizing Arbitral Proceedings, para. 57.
154
Ibid., para. 58.
155
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 29.3. See also the LCIA Rules, Art. 21.3; Swiss Rules, Art. 28.2; ICDR Rules, Art. 28.2; SIAC
Rules, r. 26.1.b; HKIAC Rules, Art. 25.2; CIETAC Rules, Art. 44.2.
156
LCIA Rules, Art. 22.1.iv.
157
SIAC Rules, Rule 27.d.
158
CIETAC Rules, Art. 44.2.
159
DIAC Rules, Art. 27.4.
160
AAA Rules, Art. 36.
161
WIPO Rules, Art. 50.
162
ICSID Rules, r. 40.1.
163
WIPO Rules, Art. 49 (on motion of a party).
164
WIPO Rules, Art. 51 (with the agreement of the parties).
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
