Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638643 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section A. - Overview
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 6 - Conduct of the Proceedings
Section A. - Overview
(a) Introduction
6. 01
An international arbitration may be conducted in many different ways. There are few fixed rules. Institutional and ad hoc rules
of arbitration often provide an outline of the various steps to be taken, but detailed regulation of the procedure to be followed
is established either by agreement of the parties, or by directions from the arbitral tribunal, or by a combination of the two. The
flexibility that this confers on the arbitral process is a reason why parties choose international arbitration over other forms of
dispute resolution in international business and trade. The only certainty is that the parties’ counsel should not bring with them
the rulebooks from their home courts. The rules of civil procedure that govern proceedings in national courts have no place in
arbitrations, unless the parties expressly agree to adopt them.
6. 02
In general, an arbitral tribunal must conduct the arbitration in accordance with the procedure agreed by the parties. If it fails
to do so, the award may be set aside, or refused recognition and enforcement. 1  However, the freedom of the parties to dictate
the procedure to be followed in an international arbitration is not unrestricted. The procedure that they establish must comply
with any mandatory rules 2  and public policy requirements of the law of the juridical seat of the arbitration. 3  It must also take
into account the provisions of the international conventions on arbitration, which aim to ensure that arbitral proceedings are
conducted fairly, and the tribunal’s own view of how the procedure can be conducted most efficiently. 4  Accordingly, a balance
must be struck between the parties’ wishes concerning the procedure to be followed, the tribunal’s views, and any overriding
requirements of the legal regime governing the arbitration.
6. 03
In some respects, an international arbitration is like a ship. An arbitration may be said to be ‘owned’ by the parties, just as a
ship is owned by shipowners. But the ship is under the day-to-day command of the captain, to whom the owners hand control.
The owners may dismiss the captain if they wish (and can agree) and hire a replacement, but there will always be someone
on board who is in command. 5
6. 04
At the beginning of an international arbitration, the parties are firmly in control of the process. In arbitration, in which there is
no institution involved, they may—and sometimes do—write a complete set of procedural rules to govern the way in which the
proceedings are to be handled. When they subsequently appoint an arbitral tribunal, by whatever method they have agreed, that
tribunal is constrained by that agreed procedural framework. In institutional arbitration, the procedural framework is provided
by the institution’s rules, to which the parties agreed when they signed the arbitration agreement and which they put into effect
when they referred the resolution of disputes between them to the rules of the institution concerned.
6. 05
When an arbitral tribunal is constituted, day-to-day control of the proceedings begins to pass to that tribunal. However, the
transfer of control is neither total nor immediate. The tribunal usually engages in a dialogue with the parties on procedural
matters, and often a first ‘procedural order’ is issued to design the essential elements of the process and the time limits within
which each stage is to take place.

Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638643 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
6. 06
Many tribunals make considerable efforts, often adopting compromises in the process, to enable ‘Procedural Order No. 1’
to carry the subheading ‘By Consent’. However, whether or not the procedural order is made by consent, once it is made
the procedure will acquire a desirable degree of predictability. The tribunal will be more firmly in control to ensure that the
procedural steps are completed on time, and will have a firm basis for determining the almost inevitable procedural issues that
will arise between the parties as the arbitration moves forward. 6  By the time of the witness hearings, the tribunal is fully in
command (in the sense of being ‘captain of the ship’). In any event, by that stage the parties usually find it easier to ask the
tribunal for directions on disputed procedural issues than to attempt to reach agreement between themselves.
(b) Party autonomy
6. 07
Party autonomy is the guiding principle in determining the procedure to be followed in an international arbitration. It is a
principle that is endorsed not only in national laws, but by international arbitral institutions worldwide and by international
instruments such as the New York Convention and the Model Law. The legislative history of the Model Law shows that
this guiding principle was adopted without opposition: 7  Article 19(1) of the Model Law itself provides that: ‘Subject to the
provisions of this Law, the parties are free to agree on the procedure to be followed by the arbitral tribunal in conducting the
proceedings.’ This principle follows both Article 2 of the 1923 Geneva Protocol, which provided that ‘[t]he arbitral procedure,
including the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, shall be governed by the will of the parties [ … ]’, and Article V(1)(d) of
the New York Convention, under which recognition and enforcement of a foreign arbitral award may be refused if ‘the arbitral
procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties’.
6. 08
Article 19 of the ICC Rules provides:
The proceedings before the arbitral tribunal shall be governed by the Rules and, where the Rules are silent, by
any rules which the parties or, failing them, the arbitral tribunal may settle on, whether or not reference is thereby
made to the rules of procedure of a national law to be applied to the arbitration.
Adopting a similar approach, Article 14.4 of the LCIA Rules states that: ‘The parties may agree on joint proposals for the
conduct of their arbitration for consideration by the Arbitral Tribunal.’ In investor–state arbitrations, ICSID adopts a similar
approach, its Rule 29.4 requiring that, ‘[b]efore the first session, the Tribunal shall invite the parties’ views on procedural
matters’ relating to the conduct of the proceedings.
(c) Limitations on party autonomy
6. 09
In the exercise of their autonomous authority, the parties may confer upon the arbitral tribunal such powers and duties as they
consider appropriate to the specific case. They may choose formal or informal methods of conducting the arbitration, adversarial
or inquisitorial procedures, documentary or oral methods of presenting evidence, and so forth. They may even dispense with a
hearing if they wish to do so. The exercise of this autonomy is, however, limited by certain requirements that may be categorised
under the following headings.
(i) Equal treatment
6. 10

Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638643 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
If party autonomy is the first principle to be applied in relation to procedure in international arbitration, equality of treatment
is the second—and it is of equal importance. This principle is given express recognition both in the New York Convention 8
and in the Model Law, Article 18 of which states: ‘The parties shall be treated with equality and each party shall be given
a full opportunity of presenting his case.’
6. 11
The concept of treating the parties with equality is fundamental in all civilised systems of civil justice. 9  The provision
in the UNCITRAL Rules to the effect that the arbitral tribunal may conduct the arbitration in such manner as it considers
appropriate 10  is qualified by the proviso that it must treat the parties with equality. The same concept underlies other sets
of arbitration rules. 11
6. 12
The requirement to treat the parties with equality thus operates as a limitation on party autonomy. For instance, a provision
in a submission agreement that only one party should be heard by the arbitral tribunal might well be treated as invalid (for
example by an enforcement court) even if both parties originally agreed to it. The UNCITRAL Secretariat recognised the
dilemma in the report that led to the Model Law:
[I]t will be one of the more delicate and complex problems of the preparation of a model law to strike a balance
between the interest of the parties to freely determine the procedure to be followed and the interests of the legal
system expected to give recognition and effect thereto. 12
(ii) Public policy
6. 13
The parties must not purport to confer powers upon an arbitral tribunal that would cause the arbitration to be conducted in a
manner contrary to the mandatory rules or public policy of the state in which the arbitration is held. One important mandatory
rule that has already been considered requires that each party should be given a fair hearing or, as the Model Law expresses
it, ‘a full opportunity of presenting his case’.
6. 14
At first sight, the word ‘full’ can be misleading. It conjures visions of a party being entitled to present as much argument and
evidence as it sees fit. But, in this context, the word ‘full’ must be given a sensible meaning, and in practice it seems unlikely
that a national court would set aside an award where the tribunal took a clearly reasonable and proportionate approach to
limiting the scope of the evidence that a party wished to present. Indeed, most sets of modern arbitration rules now expressly
provide that a party need be given only a ‘reasonable opportunity to present its case’, which should encourage arbitral
tribunals to balance opportunity with efficiency in determining appropriate arbitral procedures. 13
6. 15
Any agreement between the parties purporting to confer power on the arbitral tribunal to perform an act that would be contrary
to a mandatory rule (or to the public policy) of the country in which the arbitration is taking place would be unenforceable in
that country, at least to the extent of the offending provision. So would any provision that purports to give the arbitral tribunal
power to perform an act that is not capable of being performed by arbitrators under the law applicable to the arbitration
agreement, or under the law of the seat of arbitration. 14
(iii) Arbitration rules
6. 16

Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638643 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
Limitations may also be introduced by the operation of the arbitration rules chosen by the parties. Such rules usually contain
few mandatory provisions in relation to the conduct of the proceedings. For example, the UNCITRAL Rules specify only
the following:
 
• under Article 17.1, the parties must be treated with equality and, at an appropriate stage of the proceedings, each party
must be given a reasonable opportunity of presenting its case;
 
• under Article 17.3, the tribunal must hold a hearing if either party requests one at an appropriate stage of the proceedings;
 
• under Articles 20 and 21, there must be one consecutive exchange of written submissions (a ‘statement of claim’ and
a ‘statement of defence’); and
 
• under Article 29.5, if the tribunal appoints an expert, it may give the parties the opportunity to question that expert at
a hearing and the parties must be given an opportunity to present their own expert witnesses on the points at issue.
(iv) Third parties
6. 17
The parties to an arbitration may not validly agree to confer powers on the arbitral tribunal that directly affect persons who
are not parties to the arbitration agreement, unless a special provision of the applicable law enables them to do so. This is
rare. 15  This principle applies to matters of substance, as well as procedure. For example, an arbitral tribunal cannot direct a
person who is not found to be a party to the arbitration agreement to pay a sum of money or to perform a particular act.
6. 18
Concerning procedural matters, an arbitral tribunal may direct the parties to produce documents, to attend hearings, or to
submit to examination—but it usually has no power to compel third parties to do so, even if the parties to the arbitration have
purported to confer such a power on the tribunal. The participation of third parties in arbitration proceedings, whether by
giving evidence or producing documents, may usually be compelled only by invoking the assistance of a national court of
competent jurisdiction. 16  This is not to say that arbitral tribunals cannot give directions that affect the rights of third parties.
For example, an arbitral tribunal may direct the parties to disclose whether they are receiving third-party funding, and the
terms of that funding. 17  Arbitral tribunals may also allow third parties to participate (in some capacity) as amicus curiae. 18
(d) International practice
6. 19
There is no universally recognised comprehensive set of detailed procedural rules governing international arbitrations. As
described in Chapter 1, each arbitral tribunal is different, each dispute is different, and each case deserves to be treated differently.
But there are basic underlying structures, built on three elements: first, the international conventions 19  (and the Model Law), to
which reference has been made; secondly, the various established sets of international arbitration rules; and thirdly, the practice
of experienced arbitrators and counsel.
6. 20
The international conventions and the Model Law do not prescribe the way in which an international arbitration should be
conducted, but merely establish general principles intended to ensure a fair procedure and an award that is enforceable both
domestically and internationally.
6. 21
Even the established sets of international rules—such as those of the ICC, the ICDR, and the LCIA (and, for ad hoc arbitrations,
those of UNCITRAL)—do not describe in detail the way in which an international arbitration should be conducted. This means
that, in practice, it is for the arbitral tribunal and the parties to work together to establish procedures suitable to the circumstances
of the particular case. Indeed, many sets of arbitration rules now expressly provide that the tribunal and the parties have a

Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638643 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
positive duty to design the procedure so that it provides a fair, expeditious, and cost-effective means for the resolution of the
matters in dispute. 20  In doing so, the arbitral tribunal and the parties should consider, and find answers to, a series of practical
questions, such as the following.
 
• Is a confidentiality agreement required? 21
 
• Is this a case in which it would be helpful for the tribunal to determine preliminary issues, and if so, what type of issue(s)?
 
• If, as is usual, there are to be written submissions, should they be exchanged sequentially or simultaneously?
 
• How is the production of documentary evidence to be handled?
 
• How is the evidence of witnesses to be presented? Are there to be written witness statements and reply statements, and
if so, are there are any special considerations to take into account, other than the timing of such statements?
 
• Is an oral hearing necessary, and if so, how long does it need to be in light of the parties’ written submissions and evidence?
 
• Should there be a pre-hearing conference (if one is not prescribed by the rules adopted by the parties), and if so, at what
stage of the proceedings?
 
• How much time should be reserved for the witness hearing, and when is it likely to be possible to fix dates and make the
necessary bookings of hearing rooms, breakout rooms, court reporters, and so forth?
These are all important practical questions that are discussed in this chapter. First, however, it is useful to consider the way in
which the procedural ‘shape’ of an international arbitration differs from that of civil dispute resolution in national courts.
(e) Procedural shape of a typical international arbitration
6. 22
Two elements in particular distinguish the procedural shape of an international arbitration from civil dispute resolution
procedures in national courts. The first is that, unlike judges, it would be unusual for every arbitrator on the tribunal to be
resident at the seat of the arbitration. This means that it is difficult to convene a physical hearing or procedural meeting at short
notice and at relatively low cost.
6. 23
The second element is that time spent at hearings is ‘premium time’ in terms of cost to the parties. Not only is each day for
which the tribunal is in session likely to be very costly, but the more time that arbitrators and the parties’ counsel are expected
to spend together, the more difficult it will be to find a date (or dates) on which all concerned can be assembled.
6. 24
There are many different ways of conducting an arbitration, and in drafting the first procedural order, a ‘standard form’ should
not replace an order that is specifically tailored to fit the essential features of the dispute between the parties. But in what
follows we try to trace the path along which a typical modern international arbitration will usually proceed. In doing this, we
are concerned with what takes place once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted and up to the point at which the proceedings
are closed by that tribunal, following delivery of the parties’ final oral or written submissions. The work of commencing the
arbitration and establishing the arbitral tribunal has been covered earlier in this volume. 22  The award and any proceedings that
may follow that award (for instance, in enforcing it if it becomes necessary to do so) are discussed later. 23
Footnotes

Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638643 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
1
An award may be set aside under the Model Law if ‘the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement
of the parties’, and this is also a ground for refusal of recognition or enforcement: Arts 34(2)(a)(iv) and 36(1)(a)(iv).
See also New York Convention, Art. V(1)(d).
2
See the above provisions of the Model Law and the New York Convention, and see Chapter 2.
3
For a discussion of the seat of the arbitration, see Chapter 3, paragraphs 3.27 ff.
4
See, by way of example, the English Arbitration Act, at s. 33, which imposes a duty on the arbitral tribunal to ‘act fairly
and impartially as between the parties’, and to ‘adopt procedures suitable to the circumstances of the particular case,
avoiding unnecessary delay or expense’.
5
See Veeder, ‘Whose arbitration is it anyway: The parties’ or the arbitration tribunal’s? An interesting question’, in Hill
and Newman (eds) The Leading Arbitrators’ Guide to International Arbitration (2nd edn, Juris, 2008), p. 337, at pp.
340–341.
6
Rowley and Wisner, ‘Party autonomy and its discontents: The limits imposed by arbitrators and mandatory laws’ (2011)
5 World Arb & Med Rev 321, at 321, conceive of this as an expression of party autonomy in which the arbitrator ‘giv[es]
effect to the parties’ choices in running the arbitration’. Pryles, ‘Limits to party autonomy in arbitral procedure’ (2007)
24 J Intl Arb 327 explains the procedural autonomy of the tribunal as a product of a tripartite contract between parties and
tribunal, mandatory law, and institutional rules. Fernandez Arroyo, ‘Arbitrator’s procedural powers: The last frontier of
party autonomy?’, in Ferrari (ed.) Limits to Party Autonomy in International Commercial Arbitration (JurisNet, 2016),
p. 202.
7
See, e.g., UNCITRAL, Report of the Secretary-General: Possible Features of a Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration, UN Doc. A/CN.9/207(UN, 1981), para. 17: ‘Probably the most important principle on which the Model
Law should be based is the freedom of the parties in order to facilitate the proper functioning of international commercial
arbitration according to their expectations.’
8
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(b): ‘Recognition and enforcement of the award may be refused [ … ] if [… t]he party
against whom the award is invoked was [ … ] unable to present his case [ … ]’.
9
Kotuby Jr and Sobota, General Principles of Law and International Due Process: Principles and Norms Applicable in
Transnational Disputes (Oxford University Press, 2017).
10
UNCITRAL Rules (as revised in 2010), Art. 17.1.
11
See, e.g., WIPO Rules, Art. 38.b; ICDR Rules, Art. 22.1; AAA Rules, Art. 32.a. See also the Swiss Rules, Art. 19.1,
and HKIAC, Art. 13.1, which both refer to ‘equal treatment’. The corresponding provisions of the ICC Rules, Art. 22.4,
the LCIA Rules, Art. 14.1.i, and the DIAC Rules, Art. 17.2 do not expressly mention ‘equality’, but the phrase ‘fairly
and impartially’ must encompass it.
12
UNCITRAL, fn. 7, para. 21.
13
See, e.g., UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 17.1; ICC Rules, Art. 22.4; LCIA Rules, Art. 14.1.i; SCC Rules, Art. 23.2; CIETAC
Rules, Art. 35.1; HKIAC Rules, Art. 13.1. Compare DIAC Rules, Art. 17.2; VIAC Rules, Art. 28.1; Swiss Rules, Art.
19.1.
14
For example, the administration of oaths by arbitrators in a country in which the law allows oaths to be administered
only by judicial officers.
15
For example, in the United States, the Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 (FAA), § 7, allows an arbitrator to issue a summons
to order the attendance of a third party as a witness at the arbitral proceedings; but court assistance is necessary to enforce
the summons if the third party refuses to obey it.
16
This is considered in more detail in Chapter 7, paragraphs 7.46 ff.
17
See, e.g., Westmoreland Mining Holdings, LLC v Government of Canada, ICSID Case No. UNCT/20/3, Procedural
Order No. 1, [22.1], [22.2].
18
See, e.g., Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Procedural Order
No. 5, 2 February 2007.
19
This is considered in more detail in Chapter 1, paragraphs 1.98 ff.
20
See, e.g., ICC Rules, Art. 22; UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 17.1; LCIA Rules, Art. 14.1 and 14.5; Swiss Rules, Arts 16 and
19.1; SCC Rules, Art. 23.2; ICDR Rules, Art. 22.1 and 22.2; SIAC Rules, Rule 19.1; HKIAC Rules, Art. 13.1.
21
Some jurisdictions impose confidentiality obligations upon the arbitrators and parties, as a matter of statute. For example,
the Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, at s. 42A (as amended by the Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
2019), provides that ‘Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the arbitrator, the
arbitral institution and the parties to the arbitration agreement shall maintain confidentiality of all arbitral proceedings
except award where its disclosure is necessary for the purpose of implementation and enforcement of award’.
22
See Chapter 4.
23
See Chapter 9.

Section A. - Overview, UKBC-REDFERN 530638643 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
