Ex parte orders, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407022 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Ex parte orders
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Ex parte orders
28-9
There is an issue as to whether a Tribunal has the right to grant interim measures or conservatory relief on an ex parte basis
either under the Rules or under applicable law. The most controversial part of the modification to the UNCITRAL Model Law
related to its provision for ex parte orders and there is a debate as to whether a Tribunal should ever have the right to grant
such measures without hearing the other party. 464
28-10
The Rules do not deal with the issue of whether a Tribunal may issue an ex parte order for conservatory or interim measures
or whether an Emergency Arbitrator may do so under art.29. The laws of France, Switzerland, England and the US also do
not deal with the issue expressly.
28-11
State courts in most instances do have the possibility of issuing ex parte orders or judgments to deal with particularly urgent
matters, and do so in support of arbitration, for example. 465  Therefore, there is a real issue as to whether international arbitral
tribunals should not have the same right at least in theory. A main difference between state courts and Tribunals is that the state
courts that issue ex parte orders have set procedures for doing so and well settled concepts, such as the requirement of “full and
fair disclosure” as understood in England for example, that provide the basis for such orders.
28-12
For the authors, a Tribunal has the right to act ex parte, although the circumstances in which it should do so are exceptionally
limited. As regards the power, the issue is one of the interpretation of the relevant arbitration agreement within the context of
the applicable law. Where an arbitration is expressed in general terms, as the ICC model clause for example, then the Tribunal
has jurisdiction to decide the dispute between the parties. The issue is then whether the parties could reasonably have viewed
the granting of ex parte interim measures as being within the scope of that power. For the authors, to paraphrase Lord Hoffman’s
approach in Fiona Trust, 466  a rational businessman entering into an arbitration agreement would take the view that a Tribunal
would have the right to deal in any way reasonably necessary to the protection of the parties’ interests pending resolution of
the dispute. That jurisdiction must include the right to issue an order ex parte in exceptional circumstances where such an order
is required to ensure that the dispute is properly resolved. For example, if the issue is the protection of a trade secret and one
party is about to divulge the trade secret, then a Tribunal should have the right to prevent that, if necessary on an ex parte basis.
Perhaps more frequently, if a party is seeking interim relief, then the Tribunal must have jurisdiction to order parties to maintain
the status quo pending the hearing on interim relief and in some circumstances that order may have to be issued ex parte. 467
28-13
However, the circumstances in which a Tribunal should issue an order ex parte are very rare, as issuing an ex parte order
involves ignoring a party’s general right to be heard. Moreover the effective duration for which the ex parte order should be in
force should be such as to permit the opposing party to promptly respond. Any ex parte order should be aimed at preventing
irremediable damage that is likely to occur during the lapse of time necessary to summon both parties—by telephone or other
instant communications if need be—so that both parties can present their arguments.

Ex parte orders, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407022 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
464
Van Houtte, “Ten Reasons Against a Proposal for Ex Parte Interim Measures of Protection in Arbitration; Derains,
L’arbitre et l’octroi de mesures provisoires ex parte”, Les Cahiers de l’Arbitrage 2003/2 1re partie, p.45; Gaffney,
“Ex Parte Measures in International Arbitration” (2002) Mealey’s IAR Vol.17 No.11 p.39. Graham “Interim Measures:
Ongoing Regulation and Practices (A view from the UNCITRAL Arbitration Regime)” in van den Berg (ed), 50 Years
of the New York Convention: ICCA Congress Series, Vol.14, pp.539–569.
465
In ICC Case No.20518, the English court issued a freezing order to block the amount in dispute with respect to an oil
purchase pending the arbitration. (One of the authors was president in the case.) In LCIA Arbitration No.111926, a New
York court blocked the proceeds of payment for an oil transfer pending arbitration in London. (One of the authors was
sole arbitrator in the case.)
466
See para.16 of Lord Hoffman’s opinion in Fiona Trust & Holding Corp v Privalov [2007] UKHL 40.
467
The 2012 Secretariat’s Guide, para.3-1040 takes the view that there is no place for ex parte interim relief under the Rules
but go on to say that arbitral tribunals have occasionally issued an order to maintain the status quo pending resolution
of the matter.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
