The Witness Procedure in the IBA of Rules on Evidence, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407006...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
The Witness Procedure in the IBA of Rules on Evidence
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
The Witness Procedure in the IBA of Rules on Evidence
26-31
The IBA Rules on Evidence set out a procedure for taking evidence at hearings. 421  Although not usually adopted by Tribunals
as such, art.8 of the IBA Rules on Evidence helps in identifying the issues and potential solutions. It provides as follows:
 
“1.Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, each Party shall inform the Arbitral Tribunal and the other
Parties of the witnesses whose appearance it requests. Each witness (which term includes, for the purposes
of this Article, witnesses of fact and any experts) shall, subject to Article 8.3, appear for testimony at the
Evidentiary Hearing if such person’s appearance has been requested by any Party or by the Arbitral Tribunal.
 
2.At the request of a Party or on its own motion, the Arbitral Tribunal may, after consultation with the Parties,
order that the Evidentiary Hearing be conducted as a Remote Hearing. In that event, the Arbitral Tribunal
shall consult with the Parties with a view to establishing a Remote Hearing protocol to conduct the Remote
Hearing efficiently, fairly and, to the extent possible, without unintended interruptions. The protocol may
address:
 
(a)the technology to be used;
 
(b)advance testing of the technology or training in use of the technology;
 
(c)the starting and ending times considering, in particular, the time zones in which participants will be
located;
 
(d)how Documents may be placed before a witness or the Arbitral Tribunal; and
 
(e)measures to ensure that witnesses giving oral testimony are not improperly influenced or distracted.
 
3.The Arbitral Tribunal shall at all times have complete control over the Evidentiary Hearing. The Arbitral
Tribunal may limit or exclude any question to, answer by or appearance of a witness, if it considers
such question, answer or appearance to be irrelevant, immaterial, unreasonably burdensome, duplicative or
otherwise covered by a reason for objection set forth in Articles 9.2 or 9.3. Questions to a witness during
direct and re-direct testimony may not be unreasonably leading.
 
4.With respect to oral testimony at an Evidentiary Hearing:
 
(a)the Claimant shall ordinarily first present the testimony of its witnesses, followed by the Respondent
presenting the testimony of its witnesses;
 
(b)following direct testimony, any other Party may question such witness, in an order to be determined
by the Arbitral Tribunal. The Party who initially presented the witness shall subsequently have the
opportunity to ask additional questions on the matters raised in the other Parties’ questioning;
 
(c)thereafter, the Claimant shall ordinarily first present the testimony of its Party-Appointed Experts,
followed by the Respondent presenting the testimony of its Party-Appointed Experts. The Party who

The Witness Procedure in the IBA of Rules on Evidence, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407006...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
initially presented the Party- Appointed Expert shall subsequently have the opportunity to ask additional
questions on the matters raised in the other Parties’ questioning;
 
(d)the Arbitral Tribunal may question a Tribunal-Appointed Expert, and he or she may be questioned by
the Parties or by any Party-Appointed Expert, on issues raised in the Tribunal-Appointed Expert Report,
in the Parties’ submissions or in the Expert Reports made by the Party-Appointed Experts;
 
(e)if the arbitration is organised into separate issues or phases (such as jurisdiction, preliminary
determinations, liability and damages), the Parties may agree or the Arbitral Tribunal may order the
scheduling of testimony separately for each issue or phase;
 
(f)the Arbitral Tribunal, upon request of a Party or on its own motion, may vary this order of proceeding,
including the arrangement of testimony by particular issues or in such a manner that witnesses be
questioned at the same time and in confrontation with each other (witness conferencing);
 
(g)the Arbitral Tribunal may ask questions to a witness at any time.
 
5.A witness of fact providing testimony shall first affirm, in a manner determined appropriate by the Arbitral
Tribunal, that he or she commits to tell the truth or, in the case of an expert witness, his or her genuine belief
in the opinions to be expressed at the Evidentiary Hearing. If the witness has submitted a Witness Statement
or an Expert Report, the witness shall confirm it. The Parties may agree or the Arbitral Tribunal may order
that the Witness Statement or Expert Report shall serve as that witness’s direct testimony, in which event the
Arbitral Tribunal may nevertheless permit further oral direct testimony.
 
6.Subject to the provisions of Articles 9.2 and 9.3, the Arbitral Tribunal may request any person to give oral or
written evidence on any issue that the Arbitral Tribunal considers to be relevant to the case and material to its
outcome. Any witness called and questioned by the Arbitral Tribunal may also be questioned by the Parties.”
26-32
The above procedure is adopted in many international arbitrations, as it provides the lawyers of the parties with the flexibility of
testing the evidence while allowing for questioning by the Tribunal. It has become less common to have the Tribunal begin the
questioning, although this can arise particularly in the case of witness conferencing discussed below. However, early questioning
by the Tribunal may well, in many instances, be in the interest of an efficient and focused evidentiary hearing provided that the
Tribunal ensures that the parties have an adequate opportunity to question the witnesses. This is not only a matter of culture
and preferences, but also of the circumstances in each case.
26-33
At evidentiary hearings, one of the first issues to be clarified is whether witnesses, whether of fact or expert witnesses, are
allowed to be in the hearing room, and if so as of what moment. The difference of treatment between fact and expert witnesses is
due to the consideration that an expert should be opining on the basis of all relevant facts, and should therefore not be deprived
of a fact witness’ oral testimony. Although not mentioned in the IBA Rules on Evidence, usually a witness of fact, unlike an
expert witness, will not attend the evidentiary hearings prior to providing his or her testimony. Therefore after a brief welcome
by the Tribunal of the parties’ and the persons attending on their behalf, witnesses are excluded from the hearing room, until
their turn has come to testify. 422  Thus, if the parties are to make opening statements at the beginning of the hearing, none of
the fact witnesses will normally be present in the hearing room. In some instances, an exception to that rule can be made if one
of the witnesses is at the same time a party representative (discussed under art.26(4)).
26-34
In medium and larger arbitrations, there is frequently a daily transcript of the witness evidence. The transcript may also be
prepared on a real-time basis subject to rectification of errors in the evening. In smaller arbitrations, the Tribunal may simply
make a tape recording of the proceedings, which the Tribunal and the parties can consult, if need be, after the hearings. 423
Although court reporters will add to the costs of arbitration (albeit often only marginally), whenever a party expects significant
witness testimony, the most convenient, most efficient and safest approach over tape recording is a verbatim transcript. 424

The Witness Procedure in the IBA of Rules on Evidence, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407006...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
26-35
Certain basic principles applicable to cross examination in American litigation, for example, are normally not found in ICC
arbitrations. For example, although a factual foundation should be present for questioning of a witness to make the cross-
examination more effective, a Tribunal would infrequently permit a party to object to questions on that basis. Similarly, although
there is reference in the IBA Rules on Evidence to certain questions not being “unreasonably leading”, it is generally not possible
to object to a question on that basis, although it is possible to comment in argument on the nature of the questioning. In addition,
cross-examination of witnesses in ICC arbitrations is usually based on the documents that have been filed in the proceedings
and it is rare that the Tribunal permits cross-examination on documents that have not previously been submitted. Likewise, it
is uncommon in an ICC arbitration to object to the testimony of a witness on the basis of hearsay. The strict evidentiary rules
of court proceedings are normally not applicable in an ICC arbitration, and will often only distract, and sometimes annoy the
Tribunal. 425
26-36
Witnesses frequently testify in a language that is not their native language. Therefore, there is in some (but certainly not all)
cases somewhat less precision as to what exactly is meant under questioning. If the witness is unable to speak the language of
the arbitration fluently, then an interpreter will be required. With a professional interpreter the questioning of the witness can
usually be conducted with no great difficulty. Generally, parties are not permitted to use their own employees as interpreters
for their witnesses.
26-37
There is a continuing difference in approach as to the time allowed for questioning of witnesses. Common law lawyers tend to
expect to be able to question witnesses for much longer than civil law lawyers. As a result, witness hearings that one side may
expect to take two weeks, may well be held in half that time.
26-38
This difference in approach may give rise to due process issues. In Generica Ltd v Pharmaceutical Basics Inc, 426  the arbitrator
refused to permit further cross examination of a third party when it became apparent that the questioning involved his liability and
when the arbitrator held that the issue was not determinative. The US Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals permitted enforcement
of the award on the basis that “The arbitrator’s curtailment of cross-examination of [the witness] was not such a fundamental
procedural defect that it violated our due process jurisprudence and therefore the New York Convention”.
26-39
In Tempo Shain Corp v Bertek Inc, 427  the Tribunal was faced with a witness who had become unavailable for an undetermined
period due to serious illness in the family. The Tribunal proceeded without the testimony on the basis that the evidence was
reflected in letters. The court vacated the arbitral award stating:
“Because [the potential witness] as sole negotiator for Bertek was the only person who could have testified
in rebuttal of appellees’ fraudulent inducement claim, and in support of Bertek’s fraudulent inducement claim,
and the documentary evidence did not adequately address such testimony, there was no reasonable basis for the
arbitrators to conclude that [the witness’s] testimony would have been cumulative with respect to those issues.
The record showed that the witness would have testified to facts that only he could have known, making his
testimony essential.”
26-40
These cases highlight the potential impact of exclusion of witness evidence as a due process issue at the place of arbitration
and the place of enforcement. Therefore, prior to taking a decision as to the exclusion of witnesses, the Tribunal and the parties
would be well advised to consider the case law in these countries on the issue.
26-41
Lawyers also have different approaches with regard to electronic presentations. In larger, complex cases, the use of electronic
presentations can be very helpful for the Tribunal, particularly where it focuses on the documents being presented to the witness.
However, it should not have the effect of taking the other party by surprise and therefore there should be some coordination as

The Witness Procedure in the IBA of Rules on Evidence, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407006...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
regards electronic presentation prior to the hearings. Usually, this can be dealt with in the pre-hearing (telephone) conference
in which the parties confirm whether or not they will be using presentation media. In addition, the electronic means should
not be a way of presenting new evidence, but rather of presenting evidence that has already been submitted to the Tribunal
(and the other party).
26-42
Other aspects of due process are discussed under art.22. One of the basic points made by the courts is that it is up to the Tribunal
to weigh the evidence, but that the lawyers should have an opportunity to present their case, subject to the overall management
of the proceedings by the Tribunal.
Footnotes
421
Part III, App.4.
422
See Bühler/Dorgan, “Witness Testimony Pursuant to the 1999 IBA Rules of Evidence in International Commercial—
Novel or Tested Standards?”, op. cit., at p.27; Fouchard, Gaillard & Goldman, op. cit., para.1287, pp.702–703; El Ahdab
& Mainguy, op. cit., paras 1233–1245, pp.729–736. Dissenting: Oetiker, “Witness before the International Arbitral
Tribunal”, op. cit., at p.270; (“Many arbitration rules provide that the decision in this regard lies with the arbitral
tribunal. In practice, arbitral tribunals often permit the presence of witnesses who will be called later, even if they must
subsequently testify on the facts that are the subject matter of the hearing.”)
423
In the event of remote hearings by videoconference, it is customary to record same, and to provide the parties with a
copy of the audio and/or video recording for their files.
424
Unless the hearing would be limited strictly to legal argument, a tape recording should be the very minimum parties
should be insisting on at any hearing, in order to avoid a subsequent dispute over what was said and agreed.
425
More generally, see Newman & Klieman, Take the Witness: The Experts Speak on Cross-Examination (New York:
Jurispublishing Inc, 2006), in particular, Newman, “Cross-examination in International Arbitration” at p.55.
426
Generica Ltd v Pharmaceutical Basics Inc, 125 F.3d 1123 (7th Cir., 1997).
427
Tempo Shain Corp v Bertek Inc, 120 F.3d 16 (2d Cir., 1997).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
