The Secretariat’s correspondence with the parties, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407035 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
The Secretariat’s correspondence with the parties
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
The Secretariat’s correspondence with the parties
20-16
The Secretariat can usually understand (and respond) in most commonly spoken languages due to the language abilities of the
members of the Secretariat. Therefore, the Secretariat may adopt one of several approaches. If there appears to be an agreement
on the language in the arbitration agreement, the Secretariat may correspond in that language, if it has someone fluent in that
language. However, the Secretariat has no obligation to correspond with the parties in languages other than English and French,
which are the official working languages of the ICC Court and its Secretariat. 91
20-17
If there is no agreement on the language of arbitration, the Secretariat may decide to correspond in a language known by counsel
of both the parties, even where this would be neither the language of the contract, nor one of the two official working languages.
The Secretariat may in some exceptional cases send out communications in two languages. It is important to note that whatever
language the Secretariat uses, the parties are always informed by the counsel in charge of the file that this is without prejudice
to the Tribunal’s right to decide upon the language (or languages) of the arbitration, in the absence of an agreement between the
parties. The ICC Court has no power to decide the language(s) of the arbitration, a matter reserved to the Tribunal. Likewise,
once the Tribunal has decided the language of the arbitration, the Secretariat remains nevertheless free to correspond in the
language it considers most appropriate in the given case.
20-18
Since the two official languages of the ICC Court are English and French, the Secretariat will make its submissions to the ICC
Court only in one of those languages. Therefore, when parties correspond in other languages, the Secretariat will generally
provide a translation of the correspondence or relevant extracts translated into English or French if the material is to be used
in ICC Court sessions.
Footnotes
91
Whenever the Secretariat corresponds in a language other than the official working languages, it generally needs to
obtain translations of those documents it intends to submit to the ICC Court.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
