Emergency Arbitrator Provisions in a Nutshell, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406971 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Emergency Arbitrator Provisions in a Nutshell
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Emergency Arbitrator Provisions in a Nutshell
29-10
Table [1] below describes in a nutshell how the system of Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings works as per App.V. There are
six different steps that can be distinguished:
 
Step 1:
A party, called “the applicant”, submits its Application for Emergency Measures (the “Application” as per art.1(1) of the
Emergency Arbitrator Rules) with the Secretariat of the ICC Court of Arbitration (ICC Secretariat).
 
Step 2:
The Secretariat will check whether in the dispute between the parties to the arbitration the file has already been transmitted
to the Tribunal. Only if this is not the case will the Secretariat transmit the Application to the President of the ICC Court.
The President checks whether, on the face of the Application, the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions are applicable, art.1(5)
of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules.
 
Step 3:
In the affirmative, the Secretariat will notify the Request to the opposing party. This party is referred to in art.1(5) (first
sentence) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules as the “responding party”.
 
Step 4:
Within two days, the President of the ICC Court will have to appoint the Emergency Arbitrator, and possibly have to fix
the place of the emergency arbitration proceedings.
 
Step 5:
Provided the proposed candidate has submitted an unqualified statement of independence, the Secretariat will hand over
the file to the Emergency Arbitrator, once appointed.
 
Step 6:
The matter will be fully in the hands of the Emergency Arbitrator: He or she will first have to get in touch with both parties
and establish a procedural timetable. He or she will then have to hear the parties, and thereafter render an Order, which
normally will include a decision on costs. Finally, the Emergency Arbitrator will send the Order directly to the parties,
without any further involvement of the Secretariat.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
