Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291549...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings
A Practical Guide to Effective Dispute Resolution: Methods & Clauses 1st Ed.
Mainwork
Part 3 - Managing Disputes Effectively: Strategic Insights and Technological Advances
Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings
Online dispute resolution
9-001
For the purposes of this chapter, online dispute resolution (ODR) is used as an overarching term encompassing the use of
technology to facilitate dispute resolution. This covers more than just real-time video or audio conferencing (sometimes referred
to by IT specialists as synchronous communication) and includes online forms, discussion boards and, most importantly,
automated tools to guide negotiation or mediation.
To put the timeline for the development of ODR into context, following the establishment of the World Wide Web and the very
first website being launched on 20 December 1990, a significant milestone in e-commerce came with the launch of Amazon
and e-Bay in 1995. 1  The first articles about ODR appeared in 1996 2  and were focused on the resolution of disputes that had
arisen online (for example, as a result of e-commerce activities).
The first significant ODR projects launched in around 1996 included the Virtual Magistrate and the Online Ombuds Office. 3
These projects had limited success, partly due to the challenges of early scepticism facing what was effectively online, automated
arbitration.
In 1998, CyberSettle was launched offering a form of automated online mediation that started with the claimant party logging
in and providing their identity, contact information and details of the claim including the maximum amount they were claiming.
The system then issued an invitation to the responding party to participate in what was referred to as an “out-of-court blind-
bidding” process. An offer-phase then started with the system collecting offers but not disclosing these to the other party. The
parties were allowed to make up to three proposals in total and were informed on each round if their offers did not match. If the
offers eventually matched, the matching offer would be presented. If there was no consensus, the parties never became aware
of the other offer and the dispute could then go to court. In the event of failure, the portal offered additional services in the form
of support from a mediator. 4  In the light of current artificial intelligence (AI) enabled tools, this early version of CyberSettle
was basic but effective with the primary value being in the connecting and facilitation of a series of offers with the added value
that the offers remained confidential, unless they reached the point where there was a mutually acceptable offer.
Soon after CyberSettle was launched, as it became clear that the volume of claims/disputes arising from the growing field of e-
commerce could not be handled manually, another ODR platform, SquareTrade, was developed to manage disputes from eBay.
The SquareTrade process was initiated by the buyer or seller filing a complaint, outlining their issues, and providing relevant
details. In a similar way to CyberSettle, SquareTrade then notified the other party and gave them a set time frame to try and
resolve the issue whilst facilitating communication between the parties. In this sense, the first stage could be described as a
form of facilitated negotiation.
If the parties failed to reach agreement after a set timeframe, then, rather than handing over to a human mediator (per
CyberSettle), SquareTrade’s system would step in and start an automated evaluative mediation process. This involved
SquareTrade using algorithms to analyse the information provided, including the original transaction details and any eBay
policies, and to suggest potential resolutions based on its analysis. If the automated mediation proved unsuccessful, either party
could request a human mediator to step in.
The use of this system increased to 60 million disputes per year by 2010 and it has been reported that SquareTrade was able to
resolve 80% of disputes in this way without any human intervention. 5

Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291549...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
In around 2006, CyberSettle faced challenges as ODR became more mainstream and it was eventually acquired by another
ODR provider, Modria, with the technology being adopted and developed for use in state courts and city/council enforcement
departments. The further development of Modria is described in Chapter Ten.
In around 2007, eBay shifted their approach and moved away from using SquareTrade as an outsourced dispute resolution
service to bring their dispute resolution processes in-house. This gave them greater oversight and control over the user experience
and, with millions of transactions, also reduced their costs. As the process was for resolving disputes between buyers and sellers
(and not against eBay), this did not create any concerns about the fairness of the process.
Behind this, eBay obtained a further benefit from bringing the dispute resolution in-house in that they could also collect vast
amounts of data on disputes. This has underpinned eBay’s ability to refine its tools and, more recently, to use AI at various
stages to try and simplify and speed up the resolution process.
Taking a different approach, Smartsettle was launched in around 1999 and focused on negotiation as its primary form of dispute
resolution. Whilst starting with a similar blind-bidding approach where the bids are concealed, it also used algorithms to analyse
case data and settlement patterns to provide probability estimates of outcomes, which were intended to manage the parties’
realistic expectations and to guide them towards reaching agreements.
In this sense it was providing a form of evaluative mediation and/or early neutral evaluation. As with other early attempts
at ODR, it acknowledged the importance of human-centred processes and started integrating its tools with more traditional
mediation and arbitration processes.
It currently offers a range of tools, including tools developed to resolve issues with a single monetary figure as the disputed
outcome, as well as modelling tools to allow parties to assess their own strategies and model opposing positions and an
“augmented intelligence” product that allows a negotiator to model more complex multi-dimensional disputes. This approach
leaves the final decision firmly in the hands of the parties but uses technology to try and enhance the approach to making offers.
More details on Smartsettle are given in Chapter Ten.
The proposition of an efficient ODR tool for consumers appeared attractive and has been adopted in various forms across the
world. However, there are also examples of attempts to introduce national platforms that have failed to develop.
An example of this is the EU Online Dispute Resolution Platform 6  which was launched in 2016 and worked alongside the
EU ADR directive (Directive 2013/11/EU) to facilitate communication between the consumer and trader, allowing the trader to
select an approved local alternative dispute resolution (ADR) institution to help resolve the dispute. One of the objectives was
to help facilitate digital trade across the EU but, after five years of use, a review showed that although two million consumers
visited the platform, only 200,000 complaints were filed, and it was determined that the platform was effectively redundant. This
is reported to be because effective private tools had been developed by the major online traders. As a result, the EU Commission
is proposing to repeal the ODR Regulation that enabled the platform. 7
Whilst CyberSettle and SquareTrade were consumer facing ODR tools, the success of their development provided a lesson to
the developers of B2B commercial dispute resolution tools that the swift, efficient resolution of a dispute is just as valuable
for business. Hence B2B tools also focus on streamlining processes that prioritise quick resolution without sacrificing fairness.
Whilst the same eBay ODR model is not suitable for B2B contractual disputes, the learning from the eBay in-house tool (and
CyberSettle’s merger with Modria) also highlighted the importance of the ODR solution being customised (or provide the
flexibility) to suit different disputes taking into account complexity, the value at stake, and the parties’ preferences.
Whilst commercial parties are unlikely to experience the frequency of disputes that eBay does, the potential value of the data
that might be submitted to an ODR platform needs to be considered when making a choice about which tool to use. As B2B
disputes often involve sensitive commercial information, ODR platforms must have robust security measures and offer private
communication and negotiation spaces. Encryption and strict data protection protocols are equally important if not crucial.
User-friendly interfaces that clearly outline the procedures are also just as important in the B2B context as in the consumer
one. The platform must be intuitive for business representatives, who are not likely to be dispute resolution experts, as well as
providing clarity as to what stage the process is at and what the time and format of subsequent stages is likely to be. In contrast to
simple consumer complaints along the lines of “my toaster didn’t work”, B2B disputes often involve more complex contractual
relationships, technical details and potentially higher stakes. As such, a B2B ODR platform is also likely to need to be able to
handle complex documents and, if necessary, to allow expert involvement as needed.

Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291549...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
One of the distinctive benefits of using alternative methods of resolution and not resorting to litigation is the greater potential
to preserve business relationships. This is likely to be of greater value in commercial transactions and, as such, a preferred
ODR platform should deliver a process that maintains commercial relationships whenever possible and not just seek speedy
settlements.
Trust and confidence
9-002
As ODR is still relatively new for commercial dispute resolution, there is a need to take care to establish trust and confidence in
the process and the fairness of the outcome. This is no different to conventional approaches to negotiation and mediation, but
the challenges presented by engaging in an online process (as opposed to just engaging in a remote hearing) can be significant.
One of the obvious issues is that ODR tools remove or reduce access to the non-verbal cues that are typically present in face-to-
face interactions. The upside of this is that, whilst it might reduce emotional tension, a problem can arise from the possibility that
a party might misread subtle emotions, or interpret intent, through a lens of bias that may itself lead to an escalation of conflict. In
circumstances where communication is purely text-based, this has the additional potential complication of creating a perception
of a party (or both parties) appearing to be cold and impersonal. This can potentially hinder trust and impede rapport building.
If the ODR process is asynchronous, the resulting time lag, coupled with a system-generated response, can also create a
perception that the process is indifferent to a party’s anxieties and urgency. This can be a double-edged sword in that it can also
take the edge off the pace and intensity of an in-person engagement that has the potential to escalate emotions. The psychology
of effective dispute resolution is considered in Chapter Eleven.
Whilst there are constraints, a well-designed ODR platform can mitigate distractions and negativity that can fuel conflict in
traditional settings. Given the importance of this, an ODR tool that has been designed to provide flexibility to the parties
stands a greater chance of dealing with the issue of emotion through personalising the process and accommodating diverse
communication styles and preferences.
A tool with the ability to tailor the functionality and interface has the potential to lead to a more effective process than the in-
person alternative. Starting with the opening aesthetics, a design that feels approachable and professional, not cold and sterile,
can have a significant impact. If the platform is not designed with this in mind, it is analogous to a third-party facilitator not
smiling or having a closed body language that, in turn, can be mirrored by the parties.
One of the distinct downsides of a purely on-line tool is that there can be limited opportunity for a participant, be they a party
to the dispute or a third-party, to say the equivalent of “can we step outside and have a quick word”. Depending on the type
of tool, this is where a designer has the potential to enhance the effectiveness by enabling secure private messaging or private
spaces for the parties and a mediator to meet and build rapport.
It is surprisingly uncommon but, in any lengthy engagement, an effective system should also provide the opportunity for parties
to provide feedback on the process. This does not need to wait until the end of the process as there are quite often small issues
that, if raised early, can be dealt with before they have a chance to infect the process.
Cultural differences affecting ODR
9-003
There are many reports on the impact of cultural differences in dispute resolution that pre-date ODR. 8  It is difficult to provide an
all-encompassing definition of “culture” as it encompasses norms, beliefs, behaviours and values, and can include subtle “micro-
cultures”. 9  In the context of effective dispute resolution, key differences across cultures can also affect critical elements of any
negotiation strategy such as persuasion via rationality versus emotionality, motivation, attributions for negotiators’ behaviours,
communication, individualist versus collectivist approaches, and confrontation. 10  Particularly relevant to international in-

Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291549...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
person negotiation and arbitration engagements are also a range of simple elements that, when combined, can conspire to defeat
any attempts to resolve a dispute through negotiation and mediation. These include interpersonal characteristics such as manner
of address, “face” (respect of self), body language and mannerisms, introductions, time, and attire. 11
It is therefore no surprise that the effectiveness of ODR can be significantly affected by cultural differences, although there
are some signs that the global evolution of an international online culture has the potential to smooth over traditional cultural
differences. In any event, as with in-person attempts at dispute resolution, users of any ODR platform must still navigate between
enforcing agreements and respecting the communication preferences of different cultures.
The basic demands on an effective cross-cultural ODR platform are to help facilitate the universal need to establish trust and
respect whilst facilitating effective communication. This has to be carefully considered by the designers of any ODR platform,
as it is relatively easy to sacrifice building empathy and trust in pursuit of speed and efficiency.
Recent years have witnessed significant advancements in ODR technology, including the integration of AI and blockchain. AI,
for instance, has found applications in enhancing decision-making processes, analysing large datasets to identify patterns, and
assisting in the negotiation and mediation processes by generating and providing possible outcomes based on historical data.
Blockchain technology, on the other hand, has introduced novel dispute resolution processes such as automated negotiation and
crowd-sourced decision-making, pushing the boundaries of traditional dispute resolution methods.
The evolution and development of generative AI tools in dispute resolution is covered in further detail in Chapter Ten.
Remote hearings
9-004
References to “remote hearings” in this book are to the use of online video, audio, or virtual reality to facilitate the entire dispute
resolution process without any in-person component. This specifically involves use of video conferencing to conduct mediation
sessions or arbitration hearings, as well as the electronic submission of evidence.
This form of hearing is also sometimes referred to as a “virtual hearing” in the sense that the hearing is taking place in a simulated
meeting room and the experience that is created by technology is not an exact replica of a traditional in-person hearing. Perhaps
subtly, the use of the word “remote” emphasises the distance between the parties, whilst the word “virtual” shifts the emphasis
to the simulated nature of the environment including, for example, to be able to see the faces of all participants at the same time
or to present evidence in a way that cannot easily be replicated in-person.
The decision to refer to these hearings as “remote” in this book is because, as the use of technology in this way has grown,
boosted by restrictions imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic, remote meetings have become more accepted as being “real”
meetings with the only difference being that the parties are not in the same room. The ongoing development of virtual reality
headsets has made it almost certain that, at some point, some arbitration hearings will be held in a virtual reality environment 12
and this will bring new challenges. 13  For simplicity, these are still referred to as “remote hearings”, but it is clear that virtual
reality technology has the potential to transform the nature and experience of hearings and raises the possibility of completely
new ways for parties to present evidence, especially in the area of construction and technical disputes.
As always, global numbers are difficult to come by, but, as an indication of the significance of the increase in remote hearings
or meetings for dispute resolution, the Centre For Effective Dispute Resolution (CEDR) biennial mediation audit, 14  records
that the instances of online mediation increased from a level of around 10% in 2019 (pre-COVID-19) to 89% in 2020 (during
COVID-19), whilst falling back to 64% in 2023.
This increase in online mediation during the COVID-19 restrictions was consistent with reports from His Majesty’s Courts &
Tribunals Service (HMCTS) which showed that remote hearings (both video and telephone) in May 2020 were around 85%,
dropping to around 50% by May 2021. 15  Whilst noting the recent trends, for the reasons set out in para.9-005, it is also clear that
the benefits of using remote hearings can be counterbalanced by the existence of some practical disadvantages and, ultimately,
a human preference to be in the same physical space as others. These factors, including possible cultural differences, may also
explain why, in some regions, the use of remote hearings has continued to reduce post-COVID-19. 16

Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291549...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
From the early days of using Skype, basic video conferencing for individuals and small businesses were popularised but often
lacked the security, reliability, and features needed for high-stakes interactions like court hearings or sensitive mediation. Spurred
on by the global impact of COVID-19 in March 2020, specialised video platforms emerged, and the use of Zoom became
ubiquitous during the pandemic due to ease of use. The further development of application platforms such as Microsoft Teams,
with an emphasis on security and integration with the Microsoft Office suite, along with the development on some platforms
of features like breakout rooms for complex negotiations, continued to enhance the use of virtual dispute resolution.
Hardware and connectivity
9-005
It might seem obvious when arranging a multi-party remote hearing, but unequal bandwidth, video and microphone quality and
availability can have a dramatic effect on the success of a remote hearing. The ideal configuration is where every party has a
multi-screen desktop/laptop with a separate 4K webcam and stand-alone microphone all connected to fibre-optic broadband
connection with all users located in a quiet room with a white screen/wall behind them. This situation almost never occurs.
Instead, it is not unusual to find that one or more parties has decided that they will connect using their mobile phone whilst
travelling or on a noisy station platform without the ability to see any documents. This may be fine for an internal meeting, but
it is not acceptable for any serious attempt to engage in effective dispute resolution through a remote hearing. As such, prior to
the first such meeting, it is essential to check that all parties have suitable access.
Whilst high-quality video is still important to provide the best opportunities for parties to be able to see facial expressions and
documents, it has been established that if there is a trade-off between the quality of audio and video, then audio should be given
the priority. 17  This is because our brains process audio cues as being essential for understanding speech and conversational
patterns and when audio is intermittent, this places a higher burden on the brain to compensate. In addition, mismatches between
audio and visual cues are extremely noticeable and can be very disconcerting. As such, because audio data has a smaller
transmission footprint than video, it is better to turn off the video if the available bandwidth does not support both. 18
Key functionality
9-006
When considering which platform to use, key considerations include whether the platform offers enhanced security, breakout
rooms, screen-sharing and document collaboration, recording, close-captioning, voice-recognition/capture and discussion
analysis.
For most commercial negotiations/mediations, confidentiality is a basic requirement. At a very high level, the parties will agree
to keep the discussions confidential, but a critical consideration should also be whether there is password protection for access,
waiting rooms, end-to-end encryption and possible considerations regarding compliance with data privacy regulations. If a
meeting is recorded, it is important to ensure that all parties are aware of this and consent to being recorded. They should also
be informed of what will happen to the recording and whether it will be made available.
For one-to-one remote negotiations, the range of tools is relatively wide but, when it comes to meetings including more than
two participants, especially for mediation, then the availability of breakout rooms becomes essential. The absence of this option
can lead to parties agreeing to stay connected but to close their video and microphones whilst speaking to each other by phone
or some smartphone-based tool. Great care needs to be taken if this option is chosen as it is not unheard of for a party to think
they have turned their microphone off only to find when they rejoin that their entire conversation has been heard by all parties
on the call.
Most remote hearing tools have screen sharing options. Again, this sounds simple in concept, but care needs to be taken. Before
offering or attempting to share documents online, a party should make sure they have tested how this works. The ideal screen
share tool should allow you to have a document open on your own screen(s) and to easily identify which document you want to

Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291549...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
share. It is not uncommon for a party to offer to share a document only to find that they are sharing their email inbox or a picture
of their partner on a beach. Taking care over these practical, even mundane, things can seem trivial but in remote hearings the
difference between someone who knows what they are doing appearing smooth and professional, whilst someone who does not
can quickly get frustrated by the technology appearing to get in the way.
In contrast to litigation, where courts may record hearings in order to provide transcripts if necessary and private recordings are
forbidden, the question of whether to record or not record remote hearings can inadvertently raise a lot of tension. If a decision
is taken to record when one or more parties seems reluctant, this can serve to inhibit their contribution. No matter what is agreed
regarding the formal recording of the discussions using the tools available on the platform, the safest thing to assume is that
one or more of the parties may record the audio using their phone. This may not be done with malicious intent but simply to
serve as a record of what was discussed.
Whilst there are a number of companies providing a transcription service focused on legal proceedings, 19  on the subject of
providing a record of the meeting, there are an increasing range of quality audio-to-text tools that will effectively transcribe the
meeting as it is happening. As soon as the meeting is finished, the more advanced tools can then use AI to provide a summary
of the meeting and/or a variation on bullet-point minutes highlighting the main topics discussed.
For clear audio in ideal conditions, the accuracy of such auto transcription (referred to as the word error rate) can be in excess
of 95%, 20  but will depend on a good audio with minimal background noise and without any party having any particularly
strong regional accent. It can also be difficult for such tools to distinguish between different speakers, especially if they talk
over each other but, if parties are encouraged to mute their microphones unless speaking, this can dramatically improve the
quality of the audio. Coupled with the development of AI, it is not inconceivable that the auto-transcription (possibly including
auto-translation) tools will develop to the point of being considered to be equivalent to human transcription within a few years.
Once the transcription can be regarded as reliable and accurate, the use of AI enabled tools to provide minutes, summaries,
analysis and actions will follow. This has the potential to reduce the problems that can arise when parties leave a dispute
resolution meeting and return to debrief/discuss the next steps. Apart from basic memory, there are many psychological
phenomena that can lead to inaccurate recollections or records of what was discussed during negotiations. These are discussed
in Chapter Eleven but, it is almost self-evident that if both parties had the same sense or recollection of what was said, agreed
or conceded during a meeting, this would increase the efficiency of the dispute resolution process.
Choosing a remote hearing platform
9-007
For anyone who uses an up-to-date version of Microsoft Office suite, they are likely to be familiar with the use of Microsoft
Teams for remote meetings. However, noting that all tools are under regular development, one of the distinctive things missing
from Microsoft Teams is breakout rooms. In contrast, these are a key feature of Zoom that makes it particularly attractive for
formal online mediation meetings. Whatever tool is selected, it is important to check or confirm the version being used. There
is nothing more annoying than reaching a critical point of a negotiation only to find that the meeting suddenly ends because
the free 40 minutes is up.
It is recommended that, prior to deciding which tool to use, a conscious assessment of specific needs is made. This should
consider the functions set out above, as well as the friendliness of the user interface before deciding. It is also worth consulting
all parties involved in the meeting whether they are happy to use a particular solution or if they have any preferences. This is
to avoid the situation where, come the time of the meeting, one of the parties discovers that they have to download and install
an app, or they cannot get the tool to recognise their camera or microphone.
Virtual reality
9-008

Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291549...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
Although under development, virtual reality (VR) headsets have the potential to provide a more immersive simulation of a
physical courtroom or negotiation space and, in future, with lifelike representations of parties. The benefit does not come from
allowing people to view themselves (and others) as cartoon-like avatars of varying qualities, but from the ability to be shown
evidence in VR. In particular, this will enhance the effectiveness of expert testimony as it will be possible to give the tribunal
a near-real walk through and exposure to see issues with construction or equipment. This use of 3D models, simulations or
virtual walkthroughs of relevant scenes will aid understanding of complex issues or testimony that are spatial in nature (e.g.
construction disputes, accident reconstruction).
However, despite the potential, there are currently some significant challenges that are likely to limit the use of VR in facilitating
virtual dispute resolution. These limiting factors include both the cost and the limitations in technology. VR headsets, and the
required infrastructure, can be expensive. Additionally, a high level of technical expertise is currently needed to set up and
manage VR environments. Recent developments in VR have also highlighted that prolonged VR use can lead to fatigue, nausea
or headaches for some individuals. Before it can be used for extended sessions, the user interfaces and design still need to be
optimised. Further problems arise from the issue of accessibility with issues arising from people with certain disabilities or lack
of digital literacy potentially finding VR environments challenging or even exclusionary.
Arbitration rules
9-009
If it is intended to conduct an arbitration via remote hearings, it is important to check whether there are any restrictions arising
either from the law of the chosen seat or, more likely, from the institution that may have been chosen to administer the arbitration.
A review of the main institutions shows that most have rules expressly providing for arbitration via a remote hearing, but this
can require the express consent of the parties and not on the whim of an arbitrator:
 
Article 19.2 of the LCIA Arbitration Rules 2020 now provides that “a hearing may take place in person, or virtually by
conference call, videoconference or using other communications technology with participants in one or more geographical
places (or in a combined form)”.
 
Article 26.1 of the new ICC Arbitration Rules 2021 provides that “[t]he arbitral tribunal may decide, after consulting the
parties, and on the basis of the relevant facts and circumstances of the case, that any hearing will be conducted by physical
attendance or remotely by videoconference…”.
 
Rule 32(2) of the ICSID Rules 2022 determines that “The President of the Tribunal shall determine the date, time and
method of holding a hearing after consulting with the other members of the Tribunal and the parties”.
 
Rule 21.2 of the SIAC Rules 2016, 6th edition, sets out that “The Tribunal may hold hearings and meetings by any means
it considers expedient or appropriate and at any location it considers convenient or appropriate”. This wording is repeated
in the draft 7th edition expected to come into force in 2024. In 2020, SIAC also provided detailed guidelines for best
practice in remote hearings. 21
Whilst not necessarily administering arbitrations, other institutions also provide guidelines for remote hearings. 22
Care needs to be taken if one party is reluctant to engage in arbitration via remote hearings but feels pressured into this. This
is because there is a possibility that, when it comes to enforcement, a party could argue that they had not had their “right to be
heard” respected. 23  It would be easy to respond/think that being “heard” is literal but, it is possible that a complaining party
could take a position that they were put at a disadvantage by having a remote hearing. The disadvantage could arise from a
technical inequality or simply that they could not participate fully remotely as they were missing the full experience of an in-
person hearing, including body language and the ability to gain the empathy of an arbitrator.
A substantial survey was carried out by the International Council for Commercial Arbitration in 2020/2021 and a report produced
in 2022. 24  The key findings of this report were that, according to the 78 national reports that were considered, no jurisdiction
explicitly provided a universal right to a physical hearing in their arbitration laws. Most jurisdictions gave the arbitral tribunal
significant discretion in deciding the format of hearings, including whether they are physical, remote or hybrid. The overall

Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291549...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
conclusion was that holding a hearing remotely does not inherently conflict with international norms or the accepted standards
for fair hearings and access to justice.
Drafting dispute resolution clauses facilitating online resolution
9-010
In order to ensure mutual understanding regarding the option to use online resolution and/or remote hearings, the parties should
include a reference to this in the dispute resolution clause that expressly agrees on the use of online resolution, either as the
primary or the alternative method of resolving their disputes. The parties should also specify the scope and extent of online
resolution, such as whether it applies to all or some types of disputes, and whether it is conducted fully online or in a hybrid way.
When discussing if reference to online resolution should be included, the parties should consider what suits their needs, taking
into account the nature, complexity and value of their disputes, as well as the availability and reliability of online or remote
platforms.
If the parties have selected an institution to administer their arbitration, they should refer to the relevant rules and standards
that govern the procedural, technical and legal aspects. Even if the choice is to conduct ad hoc arbitration, it is still possible to
adopt similar standards of online resolution developed by reputable organisations. These can also be tailored to suit the specific
needs and circumstances of the parties.
As the use of remote hearings becomes more widespread, in order to avoid inadvertently creating an issue with regard to
enforcement, the parties should also review whether the decision to conduct a remote hearing affects the validity, enforceability
and recognition of the dispute resolution agreement, process and outcome. This review should include the applicable law and
jurisdiction, as well as the selection, appointment and qualification of the neutral third parties. Particular emphasis should be
given to the notification, communication and exchange of information and documents, as well as the conduct and management
of remote hearings.
In order to avoid any last-minute objections, it can also help to agree the admissibility of the evidence presented or exchanged
online, the recording and transcription of remote hearings, and the costs and fees of online resolution. If a dispute arises, having
agreed to remote hearings, as the parties might still decide to hold a hearing in person, the wording in the dispute resolution
agreement should always provide for remote hearings as an option rather than being compulsory.
Practical considerations for remote hearings
9-011
An in-person hearing or meeting of any kind has a subtle but distinctive characteristic that a person can only see the person they
are facing. This means that, if a person is in a conventionally configured room where they are facing the tribunal or judge, they
are unlikely to be able to see the faces of any other attendees. This may have the unfortunate consequence of not being able to
see the faces of the tribunal, whilst questioning a witness and rarely, if ever, being able to see the face of any opposing counsel.
In this sense, remote hearings open up a whole new world of being able to see everyone at the same time. This means that
it is possible to catch a grimace on the face of the opposing counsel or a frown cross the brow of a member of the tribunal
when asking a witness to answer a tough question. This can work for or against the person asking the questions depending on
whether they are observing or, on the other side, trying to mask their delight or concern at a particular point being put. Once
aware of this, with a bit of conscious effort, it can be worth masking expressions, whilst more carefully watching, or scanning,
the expressions on the faces of key parties.
Other side effects arise from the fact that, by looking directly at your camera, you are simultaneously staring into the eyes of
everyone in the remote hearing. In contrast to in-person hearings, where looking down at your papers is not seen as significant,
if a person is always looking left, right, or down, this can serve to disengage and reduce the empathy connection with the party
they are speaking to. A conscious reminder to look directly at the lens of the camera when speaking can be helpful, although
this can reduce the benefit of being able to watch the other parties.

Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291549...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
It is not uncommon for a remote hearing platform to display the person’s own image in a separate small window to the top-
right of the screen or bottom of the screen. Depending on the platform, it may be possible to move this self-image but, wherever
it is, it can tend to trigger an instinctive reaction for a participant to look at their own image. It is fine for someone to check
that they are appearing on camera, but it is surprisingly common to find parties constantly looking away from the camera. This
could be because they are accessing a document from a separate screen, or it could be because they are staring at themselves
on the screen. If this happens, it is one of those other small effects that can serve to reduce engagement and interfere with the
development of empathy. To mitigate against this problem, one of the simplest things to do is to move the image or the document
they are reading from to the centre of the screen, immediately under the camera.
The future
9-012
The incorporation of technological advances in the dispute resolution process has created new opportunities and challenges for
the parties and the neutral third parties. Broad ODR platforms continue to develop, and it is highly likely that the impact of AI
will enhance the use of platforms where the technology moves beyond enabling or enhancing communication towards playing
a more active part in the parties determining what is an acceptable resolution.
The benefits of time and cost savings are clear for resolution meetings that take less than a day, particularly when the parties are
geographically remote. However, careful thought has to be given to whether a remote hearing is suitable for a complex dispute
involving a large number of witnesses and the display of documentary or physical evidence. The most important thing is that
the parties mutually agree and respect each other’s concerns if there is any reluctance. If this is considered at the outset, then
remote hearings have the potential to play a significant role in effective dispute resolution.
Footnotes
1
James Roper, The Rise of E-Commerce: From Dot to Dominance (Barnsley, England: Pen & Sword History, 2023).
2
Ethan Katsh, “Dispute Resolution in Cyberspace” (1996) 28 Conn. L. Rev. 953; E. Casey Lide, “ADR and Cyberspace:
The Role of Alternative Dispute Resolution in Online Commerce, Intellectual Property and Defamation” (1996) 12 Ohio
St. J. On Disp. Resol. 193.
3
Ethan Katsh, “Chapter 1: ODR: A Look at History” in Daniel Rainey et al. (eds), Online Dispute Resolution: Theory
and Practice: A Treatise on Technology and Dispute Resolution, 2nd edn (The Hague: Eleven International Publishing,
2021).
4
Karolina Mania, “Online Dispute Resolution: The Future of Justice” (2015) 1(1) International Comparative
Jurisprudence 76.
5
Orna Rabinovich-Einy and Ethan Katsh, “Chapter 3: Lessons from Online Dispute Resolution for Dispute Systems
Design, Section 2 Lessons of ODR: DSD Meets Technology” in Rainey, et al. (eds), Online Dispute Resolution: Theory
and Practice: A Treatise on Technology and Dispute Resolution, 2nd edn (2021).
6
Filip Tereszkiewicz, “The EU Online Dispute Resolution Platform for Consumer Disputes: A Step Towards an EU
Digital Single Market” (2016), Judicium, https://www.judicium.it/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/FT.pdf.
7
Report From the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council and the European Economic and Social
Committee on the application of Directive 2013/11 on alternative dispute resolution for consumer disputes and
Regulation 524/2013 on online dispute resolution for consumer disputes, COM(2019) 425 final.
8
Michelle J. Gelfand and Jeanne M. Brett (eds), The Handbook of Negotiation and Culture (Stanford University Press,
2004).
9
Daniel Rainey and Alma Abdul-Hadi Jadallah, Chapter 8: ODR and Cultural Components of Dispute Engagement,
Rainey et al. (eds), Online Dispute Resolution: Theory and Practice: A Treatise on Technology and Dispute Resolution,
2nd edn (2021).
10
Michelle Brett and Jeanne Gelfand (eds), “A Cultural Analysis of the Underlying Assumptions of Negotiation Theory”
in Negotiation Theory and Research, 1st edn (Psychology Press, Taylor & Francis, 2006), Ch.9.

Chapter 9 - Online Dispute Resolution and Remote Hearings, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291549...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
11
Karen Mills, Cultural Differences & Ethnic Bias in International Dispute Resolution: An Arbitrator/ Mediator’s
Perspective, Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, International Arbitration Conference (2006).
12
Jeremy N. Bailenson et al. (eds), Courtroom Applications of Virtual Environments, Immersive Virtual Environments,
and Collaborative Virtual Environments (Department of Communication, Stanford University, 2020), https://
web.stanford.edu/~bailenso/papers/Courtroom%20VR.pdf.
13
Elizabeth 
Chan 
and 
Graham 
Rhodes, 
“Arbitration 
Tech 
Toolbox: 
Lessons 
from 
the 
First 
Ever
International 
Arbitration 
Gathering 
in 
Virtual 
Reality” 
(6 
February 
2022), 
Kluwer 
Arbitration
Blog, 
https://arbitrationblog.kluwerarbitration.com/2022/02/06/arbitration-tech-toolbox-lessons-from-the-first-ever-
international-arbitration-gathering-in-virtual-reality/.
14
CEDR, The Ninth Mediation Audit (May 2021), p.20; CEDR, The Tenth Mediation Audit (February 2023), p.3.
15
HMCTS, “HMCTS weekly use of remote audio and video technologies May 2020 to May 2021” (June 2021).
16
Fabiane Verçosa, Remote Hearings, Arbitration, Breakfast, and Cyber Security, CAM-CCBC/VIAC Meeting, 31st Vis
Moot, Vienna, 26 March 2024, Cafè Prückel, Vienna.
17
Kandaraj Piamrat et al., Quality of Experience Measurements for Video Streaming over Wireless Networks, Sixth
International Conference on Information Technology: New Generations (2009).
18
M. Seufert et al, “A Survey on Quality of Experience of HTTP Adaptive Streaming” (2015) 17(1) Technical Report in
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1109/comst.2014.2360940.
19
Examples of transcription services provided to courts and institutions include Opus 2 and Epiq.
20
Korbinian Kuhn et al., “Measuring the Accuracy of Automatic Speech Recognition Solutions” (2024) 16(4) ACM
Transactions on Accessible Computing, article 25, https://doi.org/10.1145/3636513.
21
SIAC, SIAC Guides: Taking Your Arbitration Remote (2020).
22
CIArb, Guidance Note on Remote Dispute Resolution Proceedings (2020); AAA-ICDR, AAA-ICDR Model Order and
Procedures for a Virtual Hearing via Videoconference (2021); AAA-ICDR, AAA-ICDR Virtual Hearing Guide for
Arbitrators and Parties (2021).
23
Fabiane Verçosa, Audiência Remota de Instrução na Arbitragem à luz do Contraditório e de Outros Princípios
Processuais (Remote Evidentiary Hearing in Arbitration. An Analysis vis-à-vis the Right to be Heard and Other
Procedural Principles), (São Paulo, Revista dos Tribunais, 2022).
24
James Hosking, et al., Does a Right to a Physical Hearing Exist in International Arbitration? Investigating the Legal,
Conceptual and Practical Implications of Remote Hearings in International Arbitration (ICCA, 2022), The ICCA Reports
No. 10.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
