Confidentiality orders, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406873 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Confidentiality orders
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Confidentiality orders
22-61
As mentioned above, there is no need for a Tribunal generally to issue a confidentiality order with respect to attendance at
the hearings, as this is covered by art.26(3). Tribunals may be called upon to issue confidentiality orders: (i) with respect to
the existence of the arbitration itself; (ii) with respect to submissions made in the arbitration; (iii) with respect to documents
produced during the proceedings; or (iv) with respect to opinions expressed in the arbitration. A Tribunal may do so at its own
initiative, but is more likely to do so at the request of a party.
22-62
In considering whether and to what extent to issue a confidentiality order with respect to any of these issues, the Tribunal
must keep in mind the parties’ agreements, the law applicable to the arbitration itself and the law applicable to the parties.
For example, in the case of publicly-traded companies, those companies may be required to provide certain information with
respect to the arbitration to meet their disclosure obligations. These are issues that are resolved on a case-by-case basis usually
by seeking to work out a solution that meets such disclosure requirements but also protects to the extent possible the interests
of other parties as to confidentiality.
22-63
For the authors, however, the starting point is the parties’ agreement (if any) as to confidentiality. If there is an agreement as to
confidentiality, that should generally be enforced as should any provision of the contract, by a procedural order if necessary. If
there is no agreement as to confidentiality, then the issue is whether there is an express or implied obligation of confidentiality
under the law of the place of arbitration. The law governing the arbitration agreement if it is not the same as the law of the
place of arbitration has no relevance except to the extent that it may relate to interpretation of the parties’ alleged agreement
(express or implied) as to confidentiality.
22-64
In addition, in considering requests for confidentiality, to the extent that there is a government or state entity involved, the
Tribunal should consider the issues of transparency to which those entities may be subject. This is particularly the case where
the arbitration relates to an investment in a country as there is a growing trend to expect transparency in such situations.
22-65
As regards documentary disclosure, the IBA Rules on Evidence provide an indication of what most practitioners view as an
acceptable general principle, providing in s.3(13) that:
“13. Any Document submitted or produced by a Party or non-Party in the arbitration and not otherwise in the
public domain shall be kept confidential by the Arbitral Tribunal and the other Parties, and shall be used only
in connection with the arbitration. This requirement shall apply except and to the extent that disclosure may be
required of a Party to fulfil a legal duty, protect or pursue a legal right, or enforce or challenge an award in bona
fide legal proceedings before a state court or other judicial authority. The Arbitral Tribunal may issue orders to
set forth the terms of this confidentiality. This requirement shall be without prejudice to all other obligations of
confidentiality in the arbitration.”
22-66

Confidentiality orders, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406873 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
However, even this general principle may be subject to some modification—and need for clarification—where issues arise as
to parallel proceedings with related parties. For example, this type of provision does not deal with the use of a related party to
pursue a right in such parallel proceedings. Nevertheless, it is frequent that obligations along the lines of s.3(13) of the IBA
Rules on Evidence are imposed with respect to documents disclosed during the arbitration in particular.
22-67
Confidentiality orders under art.22(3) are directed at the parties but are generally applicable through the parties to the various
persons involved in the arbitration, such as the employees, lawyers and experts engaged by the parties. In some instances, the
Tribunal will at the request of a party require that such persons sign a confidentiality obligation so that the persons assume
obligations of confidentiality to the other parties in the arbitration directly.
22-68
For Tribunal-appointed experts, one would normally expect that a confidentiality obligation be inserted in the terms of reference
for the expert him or herself. A Tribunal may set out the fact that it will impose such an obligation or incorporate the terms
of reference with that obligation in a procedural order relating to the appointment of the Tribunal-appointed expert as well.
Nevertheless, a Tribunal-appointed expert is not a party and is retained pursuant to a contract.
22-69
It is generally acknowledged that the enforcement of confidentiality agreements or orders is sometimes difficult due to the
problems in assessing the damages for breach of those obligations. In the case of procedural orders issued by a Tribunal, this
concern is somewhat reduced due to the concern that most parties have as to adverse inferences, whether official or unofficial,
that a Tribunal may draw if a party chooses to breach a confidentiality order.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
