Article 25(4): Tribunal’s right to require additional evidence, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406985...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 25(4): Tribunal’s right to require additional evidence
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Article 4 of the IBA Rules on Evidence
Article 25(4): Tribunal’s right to require additional evidence
“At any time during the proceedings, the arbitral tribunal may summon any party to provide additional evidence.”
25-54
Article 25(4) refers to requests by the Tribunal to provide evidence. In most instances, the request to provide documents is
initiated by the opposing party in the proceedings.
25-55
The issue of whether, when and under what conditions a Tribunal should require production of documents from a party in
international arbitration has been a matter of much debate, and is a matter of great concern to many parties. 380  The origin of the
debate is the difference in practice between common law countries and civil law countries with respect to providing evidence.
For American litigators, documentary discovery, interrogatories and deposition discovery are an integral part of the judicial
fact-finding process. 381  In addition, in American procedure, third parties can be required to provide evidence with respect to
court proceedings. English court procedure provides for documentary disclosure of documents by one party to the other party if
the documents relate to the matters in issue in the case and, in exceptional cases, for disclosure by third parties. These common
law approaches have been contrasted with the civil law approach, where it is basically up to each party to obtain and submit
the evidence on which it relies. 382  However, in considering these approaches, it should be noted that American courts and
English law both favour limited discovery in arbitration, 383  although the difficulty lies in the practical application of this rule
to concrete requests for document production.
25-56
The IBA Rules on Evidence set out what is meant to be a compromise between the common and civil law approaches as regards
documentary disclosure. Tribunals (and parties) often decide not to adopt the Rules as such, but to agree that the principles in
the IBA Rules on Evidence will be a point of reference for the Tribunal in considering issues such as requirements that the
parties disclose documents. In this respect, the approach of the Tribunal in the Reineccius case appears to reflect the practice
of some international arbitrators to refer to the IBA Rules on Evidence as guidelines. 384  In addition, even if the IBA Rules on
Evidence have not been accepted as such by the Tribunal, parties dealing with international Tribunals use them. 385
Footnotes
380
Lionnet, “Once Again: Is Discovery of Documents Appropriate in International Arbitration?” in Liber Amicorum Robert
Briner, op. cit., p.492; Kaufman-Kohler, “Discovery in International Arbitration: How Much is Too Much?” (Jan./
Feb. 2004) SchiedvsVZ, p.13; Bernini, “The civil law approach to discovery: a comparative overview of the taking of
evidence in the anglo-american and continental arbitration systems” in The Leading Arbitrators’ Guide in International
Arbitration, op. cit., p.269; Brower and Sharpe, “Determining the extent of discovery and dealing with request for
discovery: perspectives from the common law” in The Leading Arbitrators’ Guide in International Arbitration, op. cit.,

Article 25(4): Tribunal’s right to require additional evidence, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406985...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
p.307; King and Bosman “Rethinking Discovery in International Arbitration: Beyond the Common Law, Civil Law
Divide” [2001] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.12 No.1, p.24; Cremades, “Powers of the arbitrators to decide on the admissibility
of evidence and to organise the production of evidence” [1999] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.10 No.1, p.49; Goldman, “Instance
judiciaire et instance arbitrale internationale” in Etudes offertes à Pierre Bellet, op. cit., p.219; Briner, “The Evaluation
of Evidence: Some Observations Based on the Practice of the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal” in Liber Amicorum
Thomas Bär and Robert Karrer (1997), p.41.
381
Deposition discovery involves questioning of a witness by the opposing lawyer, under oath and almost invariably not
in the presence of the judge or arbitrator.
382
This is not to say that judges in civil law countries cannot provide a party significant assistance in obtaining documents,
although not as a matter of routine and in specific circumstances only.
383
See for example, COMSAT Corp v NSF, 190 F.3d 269 (4th Cir., 1999): “Parties to a private arbitration agreement forego
certain procedural rights attendant to formal litigation in return for a more efficient and cost-effective resolution of their
disputes” cited by Webster, “Party Control in International Arbitration”, op. cit., p.125, n.15; see also s.33 of the English
Arbitration Act 1996.
384
See Reineccius case, para.25-74; Procedural Order No.3 of that arbitration appears to be based on the IBA Principles
and the Tribunal ordered that any objection to production be filed with reference to the grounds set out in art.9.2 of
the IBA Rules on Evidence.
385
The IBA Rules on Evidence may be of less weight when the parties and the Tribunal all originate from common law
countries (in which case they may be viewed as permitting too narrow disclosure) or if all arbitrators have a similar
civil law tradition (in which case they may be viewed as permitting too broad disclosure). However, this is not always
or even usually the case.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
