Section F. - Confidentiality, UKBC-REDFERN 530638605 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section F. - Confidentiality
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 2 - Agreement to Arbitrate
Section F. - Confidentiality
2. 179
The confidentiality of arbitral proceedings has traditionally been considered to be one of the important advantages of arbitration.
Unlike proceedings in a court of law, where press and public are generally entitled to be present, an international arbitration is
not a public proceeding. It is essentially a private process and therefore has the potential for remaining confidential. Increasingly,
however, confidentiality cannot generally be relied upon as a clear duty of parties to arbitral proceedings. Parties concerned to
ensure the confidentiality of their proceedings would therefore do well to include confidentiality provisions in their agreement
to arbitrate, or in a separate confidentiality agreement concluded at the outset of the arbitration.
2. 180
In this section, the following issues will be addressed:
 
• the distinction between privacy and confidentiality;
 
• the classical position and current trend as far as confidentiality is concerned;
 
• the confidentiality of the award;
 
• confidentiality in investor–state arbitrations; and
 
• institutional arbitral rules on confidentiality.
(a) Privacy and confidentiality
2. 181
As far as the hearing is concerned, the major institutional rules are in agreement: the hearing is private. Article 26.3 of the ICC
Rules states: The arbitral tribunal shall be in full charge of the hearings, at which all the parties shall be entitled to be present.
Save with the approval of the arbitral tribunal and the parties, persons not involved in the proceedings shall not be admitted. The
rules of the ICDR, LCIA, SIAC, International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), and World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO) contain similar provisions, as do the rules of commercial arbitration organisations such as the
Austrian Federal Economic Chamber, the Swiss Chambers’ Arbitration Institution, the China International Economic and Trade
Arbitration Commission (CIETAC), and the Japanese Commercial Arbitration Association (JCAA). 274
2. 182
Article 28.3 of the UNCITRAL Rules spells out the position in similar terms:
Hearings shall be held in camera unless the parties agree otherwise. The arbitral tribunal may require the retirement
of any witness or witnesses, including expert witnesses, during the testimony of such other witnesses, except that
a witness, including an expert witness, who is a party to the arbitration shall not, in principle, be asked to retire.
The ‘privacy’ of arbitration hearings is therefore uncontroversial. And if the hearing is to be held in private, it would seem to
follow that the documents disclosed and the evidence given at that hearing should also be—and should remain—private. In
principle, there would seem to be no point in excluding non-participants from an arbitration hearing if they can later read all

Section F. - Confidentiality, UKBC-REDFERN 530638605 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
about it in printed articles or on an authorised website. However, a broader duty of confidentiality in international arbitration
is now far from clear.
(b) Confidentiality—classical position
2. 183
The classical view of confidentiality is based on the existence of an implied duty of confidentiality as a natural extension of the
privacy of the hearing in an international commercial arbitration. For example, in Hassneh Insurance Co of Israel v Mew, 275
the English High Court recognised:
If it be correct that there is at least an implied term in every agreement to arbitrate that the hearing shall be held in
private, the requirement of privacy must in principle extend to documents which are created for the purpose of that
hearing. The most obvious example is a note or transcript of the evidence. The disclosure to a third party of such
documents would be almost equivalent to opening the door of the arbitration room to that third party. Similarly
witness statements, being so closely related to the hearing, must be within the obligation of confidentiality. So also
must outline submissions tendered to the arbitrator. If outline submissions, then so must pleadings be included. 276
2. 184
This position was reaffirmed in Ali Shipping Corporation v ‘Shipyard Trogir’, 277  where the Court of Appeal stated that the
confidentiality rule was founded on the privacy of arbitral proceedings and that an implied term as to the confidentiality of
arbitration was a term that ‘arises as the nature of the contract itself implicitly requires’. 278  The Court acknowledged, however,
that ‘the boundaries of the obligations of confidence which thereby arise have yet to be delineated’. 279
2. 185
In the case of John Forster Emmott v Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd, 280  the Court of Appeal nevertheless noted that the duty
of confidentiality in arbitration proceedings was not absolute and noted as follows:
[T]he content of the obligation may depend on the context in which it arises and on the nature of the information or
documents at issue. The limits of that obligation are still in the process of development on a case-by-case basis. On
the authorities as they now stand, the principal cases in which disclosure will be permissible are these: the first is
where there is consent, express or implied; second, where there is an order, or leave of the court (but that does not
mean that the court has a general discretion to lift the obligation of confidentiality); third, where it is reasonably
necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of an arbitrating party; fourth, where the interests of justice
require disclosure, and also (perhaps) where the public interest requires disclosure. 281
2. 186
The Singapore courts have adopted a similar approach, accepting the existence of an implied duty of confidentiality, but
stipulating that they will impose such a duty ‘only to the extent that it is reasonable to do so’. 282
(c) Confidentiality—the current trend
2. 187
In recent years the general trend has been against the assumption of confidentiality for international arbitral proceedings as
a whole. This trend seems to have been influenced by arbitrations in which the public interest was at play. For example, in
Esso Australia Resources Ltd v The Honourable Sidney James Plowman and Ors, 283  the High Court of Australia concluded
that whilst the privacy of the hearing should be respected, confidentiality was not an essential attribute of a private arbitration.

Section F. - Confidentiality, UKBC-REDFERN 530638605 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Specifically, the court found that a requirement to conduct proceedings in camera did not translate into an obligation prohibiting
disclosure of documents and information provided in, and for the purpose of, the arbitration. The court then concluded that
although a certain degree of confidentiality might arise in certain situations, it was not absolute. In the particular case before
the court, ‘the public’s legitimate interest in obtaining information about the affairs of public authorities’ prevailed. 284
2. 188
In another Australian case, 285  the appellate court decided that an arbitrator had no power to make a procedural direction
imposing an obligation of confidentiality that would have had the effect of preventing the government from disclosing to a state
agency, or to the public, information and documents generated in the course of the arbitration that ought to be made known to
that authority or to the public. It was said that public health and environmental issues were involved:
Whilst private arbitration will often have the advantage of securing for the parties a high level of confidentiality
for their dealing, where one of those parties is a government, or an organ of government, neither the arbitral
agreement nor the general procedural powers of the arbitrator will extend so far as to stamp on the governmental
litigant a regime of confidentiality or secrecy which effectively destroys or limits the general governmental duty
to pursue the public interest. 286
2. 189
Notwithstanding the suggestion by the Australian courts that confidentiality is not an essential feature of arbitration, in recent
years Australia has enacted legislative amendments replacing its confidentiality ‘opt-in’ system with an ‘opt-out’ system (that
is, the arbitration is confidential unless the parties agree otherwise) in respect of contractual arbitrations. 287
2. 190
In the United States, neither the Federal Arbitration Act nor the Uniform Arbitration Act contain a provision requiring the
parties or the arbitrators to keep secret arbitration proceedings in which they are involved. As a consequence, unless the parties’
agreement or applicable arbitration rules provide otherwise, the parties are not required by US law to treat as confidential the
arbitration proceedings and what transpires in them. 288
2. 191
In United States v Panhandle Eastern Corporation, 289  Panhandle brought a motion before a US federal district court for
a protective order, preventing the disclosure of documents relating to arbitration proceedings between it and Sonatrach, the
Algerian national oil and gas company. In support of its motion, Panhandle argued that disclosure to third parties of documents
related to the arbitration would severely prejudice Panhandle’s ongoing business relationship with both Sonatrach and the
Algerian government.
2. 192
The court denied the motion on the grounds that Panhandle had failed to satisfy the ‘good cause’ requirements of rule 26(c) of
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and that the filing was untimely, but it proceeded to address the question of confidentiality
and, having rejected the existence of an express confidentiality agreement between the parties, gave no credence to the existence
of an implied obligation. 290  This decision has been followed in subsequent US cases in which the courts have refused to find a
duty of confidentiality in the absence of an express contractual provision or the adoption of a set of arbitration rules containing
such a provision. 291
2. 193
Indeed, the existence of an implied duty of confidentiality is becoming increasingly rare. 292  In Sweden, the Supreme Court
has rejected the idea of a general implied duty of confidentiality in arbitration proceedings. 293  The same position prevails in
Norway (that is, an ‘opt-in’ system prevails, in contrast to the Australian approach described above), 294  and France. 295  By
contrast, in England, a duty of confidentiality is implied by law (that is, not on the basis that such a term must have been intended
by the parties because it is necessary for their arbitration agreement). 296  In Germany, Austria, and Bulgaria, commentators and
courts are divided as to whether a duty of confidentiality may be implied into an arbitration agreement. 297

Section F. - Confidentiality, UKBC-REDFERN 530638605 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
2. 194
The tension between the confidential nature of arbitration and the desirability of transparency where matters of public interest
arise was explored by the English courts in the case of Manchester City Football Club Ltd v The Football Association Premier
League & Ors. 298  In October 2019, the Premier League commenced arbitration against Manchester City Football Club under the
Premier League Rules, in relation to Manchester City’s alleged failure to provide documents and information in the course of a
disciplinary investigation conducted by the Premier League. Manchester City applied to the English High Court to challenge the
arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction, but its application was unsuccessful. Moreover, the High Court decided to publish its judgment,
even though both Manchester City and Premier League opposed publication. 299
2. 195
Subsequently, the English Court of Appeal upheld the High Court’s decision to publish the judgment in question. Having
weighed the confidential nature of arbitration against the public interest in publication, the Court of Appeal determined that
the balance was in favour of the latter. In the Court of Appeal’s view, the judgment in question did not contain ‘significant
confidential information’, and disclosure of the existence of the arbitration would not give rise to any prejudice or detriment to
the parties in circumstances where the dispute was already widely covered in the press. 300
(d) Award
2. 196
Some institutional rules of arbitration provide that the award may be made public only with the consent of the parties. 301
2. 197
It has always been recognised, however, that there are circumstances in which an award may need to be made public, for
example for the purpose of enforcement by a national court. In Hassneh Insurance Co of Israel v Mew 302  the judge concluded
that an award and the reasons contained in that award were different in character from the other elements of the arbitration
proceedings (such as notes and transcripts of evidence, witness statements, submissions, and pleadings, all of which were, in
his view, covered by the principle of privacy stemming from the fact that arbitration hearings were held in private). He found
that the award was potentially a public document for the purposes of supervision by the courts or enforcement in them, and
therefore could be disclosed without the consent of the other party or the permission of the court if—but only if—the party
seeking disclosure needed to do so in order to assert or protect its legal rights vis-à-vis a third party. 303  This position is now
reflected in many of the institutional arbitration rules.
2. 198
In addition to the disclosure of awards where required by law, disclosure of a kind takes place when an arbitral institution—such
as the ICC—publishes ‘edited and redacted’ copies of arbitral awards as a guide for the benefit of lawyers and arbitrators. 304
The ICC has also recently published guidance confirming that any award made from 1 January 2019 ‘may be published in its
entirety no less than two years after the date of [ … ] notification’, subject to any objection by the parties. 305
2. 199
Article 30.3 of the ICDR Rules provides that an award may be made public ‘only with the consent of all parties or as required
by law’. 306  These Rules further provide that, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, selected awards may be made publicly
available, with the names of the parties and other identifying features removed. 307  If the award has become publicly available
through enforcement proceedings or otherwise, then the names need not be removed.
2. 200
In England, the Privy Council had to consider in Aegis v European Re 308  whether an arbitration award in one arbitration under
a reinsurance agreement could be relied upon, by the winning party, in another arbitration under the same agreement, despite an
express confidentiality agreement in respect of the first arbitration. The case came to the Privy Council on appeal from the Court
of Appeal of Bermuda and disclosure of the award was allowed. The Privy Council said that the legitimate use of an earlier

Section F. - Confidentiality, UKBC-REDFERN 530638605 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
award in a later, also private, arbitration between the same parties was not the kind of mischief against which the confidentiality
agreement was directed. This decision has been rightly described as:
[ … ] eminently sensible in the circumstances of the case. The private and, in theory, confidential nature of
arbitration should not mean that the parties can go on arbitrating the same point ad infinitum until they get the
result they prefer. 309
2. 201
In France, the Paris Court of Appeal ruled, in Aita v Ojjeh, 310  that the mere bringing of court proceedings to challenge
an arbitration award violated the principle of confidentiality in that it caused ‘a public debate of facts which should remain
confidential’. The judgment also contains dicta to the effect that it is in ‘the very nature of arbitral proceeding that they ensure
the highest degree of discretion in the resolution of private disputes, as the two parties had agreed’. 311  More recently, however,
and in line with the modern trend, the Paris Court of Appeal in Nafimco 312  found that the claimant failed to ‘show the existence
and foundation of such a duty in French international arbitration law’.
(e) Confidentiality in investor–state arbitrations
2. 202
In the Cockatoo Dockyard case, 313  the Australian court concluded that whilst there was a ‘high level of confidentiality’ in
arbitral proceedings, this should not prevent disclosure where the public interest was concerned. It is this concern for the
public interest—and for the public’s ‘right to know’—that has led to the erosion of the principle of confidentiality in arbitral
proceedings. The need to balance the private interest in confidentiality against the possible public interest in disclosure may be
seen in arbitrations that have taken place under the treaty that established the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
2. 203
In the early 1980s, an international arbitral tribunal applying the ICSID Rules in Amco v Republic of Indonesia 314  held that
‘as to the “spirit of confidentiality” of the arbitral procedure, it is right to say that the Convention and the Rules do not prevent
the parties from revealing their case’. Balanced against this finding, the Amco tribunal nonetheless referred to a general duty
existing under international law not to exacerbate an ongoing international dispute, and relied on the existence of this duty to
recommend to the parties that they should ensure that their public statements about cases in which they were involved were
both short and accurate.
2. 204
In the years since Amco, tribunals applying the ICSID Rules, including NAFTA tribunals, have striven to achieve the same
balance. For example, in Metalclad Corporation v United Mexican States, 315  Mexico made an application for a confidentiality
order, pursuant to Article 1134 of NAFTA (‘Interim measures of protection’) and Article 28 of the (then) ICSID Additional
Facility Rules (‘Procedural orders’). The tribunal dismissed the application, finding that:
There remains nonetheless a question as to whether there exists any general principle of confidentiality that would
operate to prohibit discussion of the arbitration proceedings by either party. Neither the NAFTA nor the ICSID
(Additional Facility) Rules contain any express restriction on the freedom of the parties in this respect. Though
it is frequently said that one of the reasons for recourse to arbitration is to avoid publicity, unless the agreement
between the parties incorporates such a limitation, each of them is still free to speak publicly of the arbitration
[ … ] Indeed, as has been pointed out by the Claimant in its comments, under US security laws, the Claimant,
as a public company traded on a public stock exchange in the US, is under a positive duty to provide certain
information about its activities to its shareholders, especially regarding its involvement in a process the outcome
of which could perhaps significantly affect its share value.
The above having been said, it still appears to the Arbitral Tribunal that it would be of advantage to the orderly
unfolding of the arbitral process and conducive to the maintenance of working relationships between the Parties

Section F. - Confidentiality, UKBC-REDFERN 530638605 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
if during the proceedings they were both to limit public discussion of the case to a minimum, subject only to any
externally imposed obligation by which either of them may be legally bound. 316
2. 205
In another NAFTA arbitration, R Loewen and Loewen Corporation v United States of America, 317  the US government requested
that all filings, as well as the minutes of oral proceedings, be treated as open and available to the public. Loewen did not oppose
public disclosure, but requested that the disclosure take place only after the conclusion of the arbitration. The tribunal rejected
the US government’s request, referring to Article 44.2 of the then ICSID Additional Facility Rules, which provide that minutes
of hearings should not be published without the consent of the parties. 318
2. 206
Although the tribunal rejected the US government’s request, it did not recognise any general duty of confidentiality; rather,
it rejected Loewen’s submission that each party is under an obligation of confidentiality in relation to the proceedings. In its
award on jurisdiction, the tribunal summarised its conclusions as follows:
In its Decision the Tribunal rejected the Claimants’ submission that each party is under a general obligation of
confidentiality in relation to the proceedings. The Tribunal stated that in an arbitration under NAFTA, it is not
to be supposed that, in the absence of express provision, the Convention or the Rules and Regulations impose a
general obligation on the parties, the effect of which would be to preclude a Government (or the other party) from
discussing the case in public, thereby depriving the public of knowledge and information concerning government
and public affairs. The decision concluded by repeating the comment made by the Metalclad Tribunal, namely
that it would be of advantage to the orderly unfolding of the arbitral process if during the proceedings, the parties
were to limit public discussion to what is considered necessary. 319
2. 207
The trend towards greater transparency in investor–state arbitration has emerged more clearly in recent years. In Biwater Gauff
(Tanzania) Ltd v United Republic of Tanzania, 320  the tribunal recognised that the 2006 ICSID Rules reflected this overall
trend towards transparency. The tribunal considered the balance between transparency and what it referred to as the integrity of
the arbitral process, and concluded that some confidentiality controls were warranted, but ought to be ‘carefully and narrowly
delimited’. 321  Ultimately, the tribunal did not prevent the parties from discussing the case in public, or from publishing awards
and other decisions by the tribunal, but restricted the disclosure of records of hearings, submissions, and witness statements.
2. 208
Reflecting this trend towards transparency, UNCITRAL has published the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules already referred to
in Chapter 1. 322  The rules provide for the publication of all documents, including the notice of arbitration, written pleadings,
and lists of exhibits (and expert reports and witness statements, if any person so requests). Public access to hearings is
guaranteed and interested third parties are entitled to make submissions. However, tribunals have discretion to order that certain
documents should remain confidential if they contain protected information or if their disclosure would undermine the integrity
of the arbitral process. With the entry into force of the Mauritius Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor–State
Arbitration, in October 2017, the application of the UNCITRAL Transparency Rules has been extended significantly to all
arbitrations arising from an investment treaty concluded before 1 April 2014 where both the host state and investor’s home
state are parties thereto. 323
2. 209
Under the SIAC Investment Rules, the parties are deemed to have given their consent to SIAC to publish certain information
regarding a case, including redacted excerpts of the reasoning of the tribunal. 324
2. 210
Under the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (SCC) Arbitration Rules (2017), third parties may apply to the tribunal to make
written submissions in treaty-based investor–state arbitrations. 325  In considering such applications, a tribunal ‘shall have regard
to: the nature and significance of the interest of the Third Person in the arbitration; (ii) whether the submission would assist

Section F. - Confidentiality, UKBC-REDFERN 530638605 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
the Arbitral Tribunal in determining a material factual or legal issue in the arbitration by bringing a perspective, particular
knowledge or insight that is distinct from or broader than that of the disputing parties; and (iii) any other relevant circumstances’.
(f) Revisions to rules of arbitration
2. 211
The increasing number of arbitrations in which there is a legitimate public interest, such as the investor–state arbitrations
discussed in this chapter and in Chapter 11, has led to an erosion of the concept of confidentiality, with pleadings and awards
being publicly available on the Internet and elsewhere. Some arbitration institutions have therefore amended their rules to impose
an express duty of confidentiality upon the parties, but this may be overridden if it is judged that the public interest so requires.
2. 212
Article 30 of the LCIA Rules imposes an express duty of confidentiality on the parties to the arbitration as follows:
 
30.1The parties undertake as a general principle to keep confidential all awards in the arbitration, together with all materials
in the arbitration created for the purpose of the arbitration and all other documents produced by another party in the
proceedings not otherwise in the public domain, save and to the extent that disclosure may be required of a party by legal
duty, to protect or pursue a legal right, or to enforce or challenge an award in legal proceedings before a state court or
other legal authority. The parties shall seek the same undertaking of confidentiality from all those that it involves in the
arbitration, including but not limited to any authorised representative, witness of fact, expert or service provider.
 
30.2Article 30.1 of the LCIA Rules shall also apply, with necessary changes, to the Arbitral Tribunal, any tribunal secretary
and any expert to the Arbitral Tribunal. Notwithstanding any other provision of the LCIA Rules, the deliberations of the
Arbitral Tribunal shall remain confidential to its members and if appropriate any tribunal secretary, save as required by
any applicable law and to the extent that disclosure of an arbitrator’s refusal to participate in the arbitration is required of
the other members of the Arbitral Tribunal under Articles 10, 12, 26.6 and 27.5.
 
30.3The LCIA does not publish any award or any part of an award without the prior written consent of all parties and
the Arbitral Tribunal.
2. 213
Similar restrictions are imposed under some other major institutional rules. 326  However, such express confidentiality provisions
are no longer widespread. By way of notable example, the ICC Rules only provide that a tribunal ‘may make orders concerning
the confidentiality of the arbitration proceedings or of any other matters in connection with the arbitration and may take measures
for protecting trade secrets and confidential information’. 327  As noted above, once an award has been issued, the ICC may
publish the award in a redacted form after two years unless a party objects and will publish such awards for consultation.
2. 214
The WIPO Rules carry the protection of ‘trade secrets’ much further, as might be expected from an organisation concerned with
the protection of intellectual property rights. Article 54 of the WIPO Rules defines ‘confidential information’ as any information,
regardless of the medium in which it is expressed:
 
(a)[ … ] which is:
 
(i)in the possession of a party;
 
(ii)not accessible to the public;
 
(iii)of commercial, financial or industrial significance; and
 
(iv)treated as confidential by the person possessing it.
[ … ]
2. 215

Section F. - Confidentiality, UKBC-REDFERN 530638605 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
On application by the relevant party, the tribunal may classify such information as ‘confidential’, 328  effectively restricting its
disclosure to the tribunal and the parties. In exceptional circumstances, the tribunal may delegate this duty to a ‘confidentiality
adviser’ who will determine whether the information is to be so classified, and if so, to whom it may be disclosed, in whole or
in part. 329  As an additional safeguard, the tribunal may appoint the ‘confidentiality adviser’ as an expert to report on specific
issues on the basis of the confidential information, without disclosing that information either to the other party or to the tribunal
itself. 330
2. 216
For completeness, it should be noted that the WIPO Rules extend the protection of confidentiality to the very existence of the
arbitration, 331  to disclosures made during the arbitration, 332  and to the award. 333  The duty of confidentiality is also, of course,
imposed upon the tribunal and the WIPO centre itself. 334
(g) Summary
2. 217
One of the traditional advantages of arbitration was that it is a private proceeding, in which the parties may air their differences
and grievances, and discuss their financial circumstances, their proprietary ‘know-how’, and so forth, without exposure to the
gaze of the public and the reporting of the media. That arbitral hearings are held in private still remains a constant feature of
arbitration, and this creates the potential for confidentiality. However, many modern laws and rules of arbitration no longer
provide that—absent the parties’ express agreement—proceedings will be confidential. To ensure the confidentiality of the entire
proceedings, it is increasingly necessary to agree this expressly, either by selecting one of those remaining sets of arbitration
rules that contain an express provision of the relevant rules (for example those of the LCIA or of WIPO), or to enter into a
specific confidentiality agreement as part of the agreement to arbitrate, or at the outset of proceedings. 335
Footnotes
274
For research that points towards confidentiality as one of the reasons for choosing arbitration, see the references in
Pryles, ‘Confidentiality’, in Hille and Newman (eds) The Leading Arbitrators’ Guide to International Arbitration (Juris,
2004), p. 415.
275
Hassneh Insurance Co of Israel v Mew [1993] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 243.
276
Ibid., at 247 per Colman J.
277
Ali Shipping Corporation v ‘Shipyard Trogir’ [1998] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 643.
278
Ibid., at 651.
279
Ibid.
280
John Forster Emmott v Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd [2008] EWCA Civ 184.
281
Ibid., at [107].
282
AAY and ors v AAZ (AAY) [2011] 1 SLR 1093, 1120. The court found that the defendant had legitimate grounds to disclose
certain materials to the relevant public authorities because ‘there was reasonable cause to suspect criminal conduct’ (at
1131). See also Myanma Taung Chi Oo Co. Ltd v Win Nu [2003] 2 SLR 945. In the same way, in New Zealand, every
arbitration agreement entails a duty of confidentiality unless the parties expressly agree otherwise. An implied duty of
confidentiality also applies by default in Scotland and Spain.
283
Esso Australia Resources Ltd v The Honourable Sidney James Plowman and Ors (1995) 193 CLR 10. The case is also
set out in (1995) 11 Arb Intl, 3, 235.
284
Ibid., at 249.
285
Commonwealth of Australia v Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd [1995] 36 NSWLR 662.
286
Ibid., at 682 per Kirby P. See also Adesa Corporation v Bob Dickenson Auction Service Ltd 73 OR (3d) 787, [56] (2004),
in which the Canadian courts acknowledged that the ‘confidentiality of arbitration proceedings should be fostered to

Section F. - Confidentiality, UKBC-REDFERN 530638605 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
maintain the integrity of the arbitration process’, but stated that this should be balanced against any wider public interest
in disclosure.
287
Amendments made to the International Arbitration Act 1974 (Cth) by the Civil Law and Justice (Omnibus Amendments)
Act 2015 (Cth).
288
See Industrotech Constructors Inc. v Duke University 67 NC App. 741, 314 S.E.2d 272 (1984); Giacobassi Grandi Vini
SpA v Renfield Corporation US Dist. LEXIS 1783 (1987).
289
United States v Panhandle Eastern Corporation 118 FRD 346 (D. Del. 1988).
290
It would seem that the decision of the Court was obiter. Moreover, it has been suggested that too much should not be read
into this decision. Panhandle was seeking a ‘protective order’ to shield the arbitration documents from disclosure and
the onus of establishing ‘good cause’ is a heavy one: see Neill, ‘Confidentiality in arbitration’ (1996) 12 Arb Intl 303.
291
See, e.g., Contship Containerlines Ltd v PPG Industries Inc., 17 April 2003, 2003 US Dist. 6857.
292
For a discussion of the implied duty of confidentiality in commercial arbitration, including its historical rationale,
costs, and prospects for the future, see Partasides, ‘What has been the “spillover” effect of the transparency debate on
commercial arbitrations?’, in Kalicki and Raouf (eds) Evolution and Adaptation: The Future of International Arbitration,
ICCA Congress Series, Vol. 20 (Kluwer Law International, 2019), pp. 699–705.
293
See AI Trade Finance Inc. v Bulgarian Foreign Trade Bank Ltd, Supreme Court of Sweden, 27 October 2000, (2000)
15 Mealey’s Intl Arb Rep A1.
294
Norwegian Arbitration Act 2004, s. 5.
295
Pursuant to Decree No. 2011-48 of 13 January 2011, no express obligation of confidentiality exists in France in relation
to international arbitration (in contrast to domestic arbitration).
296
Emmott v Michael Wilson Partnership [2008] EWCA Civ 184.
297
In Switzerland, arbitrators are bound by an implicit duty of confidentiality with respect to the proceedings, but this does
not apply to the parties themselves or to third parties involved in the arbitration. It is, therefore, for the parties to provide
for confidentiality in their agreement with third parties or to agree on the general confidentiality of the arbitration, either
expressly or by reference to arbitration rules containing confidentiality obligations.
298
Manchester City Football Club Ltd v The Football Association Premier League & Ors [2021] EWHC 628 (Comm).
299
Manchester City Football Club Ltd v The Football Association Premier League & Ors [2021] EWHC 711 (Comm).
300
Manchester City Football Club Ltd v The Football Association Premier League & Ors [2021] EWCA Civ 1110, at [54],
[65], and [66].
301
See, e.g., AAA Rules, Art. 27.4; SIAC Rules, r. 39.2. See also the UNCITRAL Rules 2010, Art. 34.5.
302
Hassneh Insurance Co of Israel v Mew [1993] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 243.
303
The LCIA Rules, Art. 30 mirrors this position, as pointed out by Rawding and Seeger, ‘Aegis v European Re and the
confidentiality of arbitration awards’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 484. See also City of Moscow v International Industrial Bank
[2004] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 179, which concerned the publication of a court judgment dismissing a challenge to an arbitral
award under the Arbitration Act 1996, s. 68. The court stated that a public judgment was particularly desirable where it
involved a point of law that may offer future guidance to practitioners, but emphasised that this must be balanced against
the parties’ expectations of privacy and confidentiality in arbitration. Ultimately, the court concluded that the judgment
should remain private because the party ‘had, objectively, no good reason for insisting on [its] publication’.
304
The ICC has no specific rule as to the confidentiality of awards, although an ICC arbitral tribunal now has an express
power under the ICC Rules, Art. 22.3 to make confidentiality orders in relation to arbitration proceedings or other
matters in connection with the arbitration. Similarly, the ICSID Arbitration Rules provide that, with the parties’ consent,
ICSID ‘shall publish every Award, supplementary decision on an Award, rectification, interpretation, and revision of an
Award’ and that, for this purpose, ‘the parties may consent to publication of the full text or to a jointly redacted text’:
see ICSID Rules, r. 62(1) and (2). If, however, the parties ‘object to publication’ or ‘disagree on redaction’, the ICSID
Secretary-General shall ‘consider any comments received’ from the parties and then proceed to publish ‘excerpts’ of
the award: see ICSID Rules, r. 62(4).
305
ICC Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration, 1
January 2019, at paras 42–43.
306
Similarly, the SIAC Rules, r. 32(12) states that SIAC may publish, with the consent of the parties and the tribunal, any
award with the names of the parties and other identifying information redacted.
307
The Vienna Rules similarly provide that the VIAC may publish anonymised summaries or extracts of awards, subject
to any objection by the parties: Art. 41.
308
Associated Electric and Gas Insurance Services Ltd v European Reinsurance Co. of Zurich [2003] UKPC 11.
309
Rawding and Seeger, ‘Aegis v European Re and the confidentiality of arbitration awards’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 484, at
488–489.

Section F. - Confidentiality, UKBC-REDFERN 530638605 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
310
Aita v Ojjeh [1986] Rev Arb 583, 583.
311
Ibid., at 584. Some commentators argue that the reasoning of the French court is unsatisfactory, and that the extreme
position advanced must be seen in the context of the court’s determination to punish what it evidently viewed as a
hopeless and tactically motivated attempt to set aside an English award in the French courts: see Paulsson and Rawding,
‘The trouble with confidentiality’ (1994) 5 ICC International Court of Arbitration Bulletin 48.
312
Nafimco, Paris cour d’appel, 22 January 2004. Under France’s new Decree No. 2011-48, confidentiality obligations
apply by default in domestic arbitration proceedings. However, the Decree does not provide for confidentiality in
international arbitration proceedings. Accordingly, where parties agree to refer disputes to international arbitration, they
should make express provision for confidentiality in the contract. See Code of Civil Procedure, Arts 1464(4) and 1506.
313
Commonwealth of Australia v Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd [1995] 36 NSWLR 662.
314
Amco Corporation and ors v Republic of Indonesia, Decision on Request for Provisional Measures, 9 December 1983,
(1983) 1 ICSID Rep 410, at 412.
315
Metalclad Corporation v United Mexican States Award, Ad hoc—ICSID Additional Facility Rules; ICSID Case No.
ARB (AF)/97/1; IIC 161 (2000).
316
Ibid., at [13].
317
R Loewen and Loewen Corporation v United States of America, Decision on Hearing of Respondent’s Objection to
Competence and Jurisdiction, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, IIC 253 (2001), 7 ICSID Rep 425, 128 ILR 339.
318
Ibid., at [25]. (The current Additional Facility Rules provide that ‘[u]pon request of a party, the Centre shall publish
recordings or transcripts of hearings, unless the other party objects’: see r. 75(3).)
319
Ibid., at [26].
320
Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Procedural Order No. 3,
29 September 2006.
321
Ibid.
322
The Rules apply to UNCITRAL arbitrations under investment treaties concluded after 1 April 2014. They apply to
disputes under existing treaties only if the parties so agree. They do not affect commercial or state-to-state arbitrations.
Pro-transparency provisions are now also contained in the US and Canada model BITs, and the EU trade spokesperson
has indicated that the Rules ‘set a benchmark for all future EU investment treaties’: see European Commission, ‘EU
backs new transparency standards for investor-state dispute settlement’, Press release (11 February 2013), available
online at http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/press/index.cfm?id=868
323
United Nations Convention on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor–State Arbitration (New York, 2014) (entry into
force 18 October 2017), Arts 1 and 2.
324
Art. 38.
325
Appendix III, Art. 3.
326
See, e.g., Swiss Rules, Art. 44; HKIAC Rules, Art. 45. Rule 39.3 of the SIAC Rules specifies that the duty of
confidentiality extends to pleadings, evidence, and other materials in the arbitration proceedings, all documents produced
by another party, the award, and the very existence of the proceedings.
327
ICC Rules, Art. 22.3.
328
WIPO Rules, Art. 54.c.
329
WIPO Rules, Art. 54.d.
330
WIPO Rules, Art. 54.e.
331
WIPO Rules, Art. 75.
332
WIPO Rules, Art. 76.
333
WIPO Rules, Art. 77.
334
WIPO Rules, Art. 78.
335
See the concluding comments, which continue to be pertinent, of Rawding and Seeger, ‘Aegis v European Re and the
confidentiality of arbitration awards’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 484. The UNCITRAL Notes, paras 31–32, make the very
same recommendation. When drafting confidentiality clauses, parties may be aided by the Model Procedural Order
on Confidentiality. See also Hwang and Thio, ‘A proposed model procedural order on confidentiality in international
arbitration: A comprehensive and self-governing code’ (2012) 29 J Intl Arb 137.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
