Introductory remarks, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406947 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Introductory remarks
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
17-1
Article 17 deals with party representation. 10  It comprises now three paragraphs. The third paragraph was added to the 2012
Rules to deal with the issue of proof of authority of any party representative. The first and second paragraphs in turn were added
with the 2021 Rules. The Rules contemplate the existence of party representatives, as can be seen from art.4(3)(b), art.5(1)(b),
art.23(1)(a) and art.26(4). Article 17 expressly states that both the Secretariat and the Tribunal are permitted to request proof
of authority. In the past, the authority of the Secretariat to ask a party representative for his or her authority to act on behalf
of a party had been questioned.
17-2
There have been instances where a party challenged an attorney’s power to represent more than one of the parties to the
arbitration, or, where a power had been submitted, queried the scope of such power, in particular, whether it included the
authority to appoint an arbitrator on behalf of the party(ies). Absent an express basis in the Rules to ask for a formal power of
attorney, the Secretariat was generally reluctant to request such power, preferring to leave these matters to the Tribunal.
17-3
In many national courts, when a lawyer makes an appearance on behalf of a party, the lawyer is representing that he or she has
authority to represent the party. Often that lawyer will be admitted before the very court before which he or she is appearing.
However, in international arbitration this is not the case, although the lawyer will be expected to actually have the authority
to represent the party on behalf of whom he or she claims to appear. Therefore, it is common to require that parties provide a
power of attorney or other proof of authority to the lawyers representing them. The ICC Rules refer in several places to a party’s
representative, 11  any person(s) representing a party in the arbitration, 12  and, with respect to hearings, to the parties’ appearance
“in person or through duly authorized representatives”. 13  It is the power to represent a party, and the due authorisation to do
so, which both the Secretariat and the Tribunal are permitted to verify on the basis of art.17.
17-4
Some ICC Tribunals, but certainly not all, request that counsel of the parties submit a power of attorney, as the power to make
such requests is inherent in the powers of the Tribunal to orderly conduct the proceedings and to ensure the respect of due
process.
Footnotes
10
The 2021 Rules have left art.17 unchanged from the 2017 Rules except for the addition of subparas (1) and (2).
11
See art.3(2) and (3).
12
See art.4(3)(b) for the claimant, art.5(1)(b) for the respondent.
13
See art.26(4).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
