The consequences of the file transmission, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406969 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
The consequences of the file transmission
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
The consequences of the file transmission
16-11
The transmission of the file to the Tribunal automatically changes the direct counterpart for the parties: it is no longer the
Secretariat, but henceforth the Tribunal. In its cover letter to the parties, when transmitting the file, the Secretariat expressly
advises them to correspond directly with the Tribunal from now on. It is the latter that is from now on in charge of the case, and
which up to the final award will take all decisions, unless on matters for which the ICC Court retains exclusive responsibility. 5
16-12
The transmission of the file triggers the running of a one-month time-limit to have the Terms of Reference signed, as per
art.23(1) and the 15-day period to convene the case management conferences for arbitrations subject to the Expedited Procedure
Provisions. The Secretariat will point out in its cover letter to the Tribunal the relevant time limits. As a result, the obligation
to deal with the case in a timely fashion starts from the moment of the transmission of the file pursuant to art.16.
16-13
Under art.28(1), “[u]nless the parties have otherwise agreed, as soon as the file has been transmitted to it, the arbitral tribunal
may, at the request of a party, order any interim or conservatory measure it deems appropriate”. Therefore, once the file has
been transmitted, the Tribunal may issue such interim or conservatory measures, whether or not the Terms of Reference have
been signed. Prior to transmittal of the file, a party would have to obtain interim measures from a national court, or apply for
emergency arbitrator measures under art.29. That does not preclude the parties from filing a request for interim relief with
their Request or Answer or shortly thereafter. Nevertheless, the Tribunal will only be able to deal with it once the file has been
transmitted. In addition, prior to the transmittal of the file to the Tribunal, a party may file an application under Part VII D of the
2021 ICC Note for the Expeditious Determination of Manifestly Unmeritorious Claims or Defenses, although, as with interim
measures, such an application can only be dealt with once the file has been transmitted to and received by the Tribunal.
16-14
As noted above, for arbitrations under the Expedited Procedure Provisions, a case management conference is to be convened
within 15 days after transmittal of the file to the Tribunal. With respect to other arbitrations, pursuant to art.24(1), the case
management conference must be convened when drawing up the Terms of Reference, or as soon as possible thereafter, i.e.
within a relatively short period of the transmission of the file to the Tribunal.
16-15
Under art.25(1), “[t]he arbitral tribunal shall proceed within as short a time as possible to establish the facts of the case by all
appropriate means”. Usually, the Tribunal deals with procedural issues after the Terms of Reference have been signed. However,
nothing prevents the Tribunal from taking steps with respect to establishing the facts of the case as soon as it has received
the file from the Secretariat and it may well be appropriate to do so to expedite the proceedings. This is particularly the case
where the arbitration is subject to the Expedited Procedure Provisions or where there is a pending application for Expeditious
Determination of Manifestly Unmeritorious Claims or Defenses.
16-16
Pursuant to art.11(3), the arbitrator’s disclosure duty regarding only facts or circumstances of a similar nature to those referred
to in art.11(2) concerning his or her impartiality or independence is an ongoing one that exists until the end of the arbitration. 6
As a practical matter, it may be that upon receipt of the file an arbitrator realises that an issue with respect to his impartiality
and/or independence could exist, of which it had not been aware of before. The transmission of the file also represents an

The consequences of the file transmission, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406969 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
important moment for the arbitrator when it comes to assessing the disclosure duty towards the parties. 7  For example, the
Request or Answer may provide further details of the parties or their action, or the probable witnesses that raise the issue of
a conflict. It may also be that additional or replacement counsel has been appointed for one of the parties, which may result
in the need for disclosure by one of the arbitrators. 8  The usual solution in such a case is for the arbitrator to disclose the fact
and invite the comments of the parties. Such disclosure is required by art.11(3). Since the proceedings have just commenced,
replacement of an arbitrator may be less problematic at this stage than later in the proceedings. In addition, as the Tribunal will
not have taken any substantive steps, a party may well waive a potential conflict as it may have little or no incentive to have an
arbitrator replaced. Disclosure later in the proceedings may result in a more critical approach by the parties if they have become
dissatisfied with the Tribunal’s procedural or substantive decisions.
16-17
Once the Tribunal has received the file, it will be entitled to a fee even if the arbitration thereafter gets settled and thus withdrawn
shortly thereafter, and provided it has done some work, e.g. read into the file. Pursuant to art.2 of Appendix III, when fixing
the arbitrators’ fees, the Court takes into consideration, amongst other factors, the time spent by the arbitrators. As regards
the payment of advances on fees, the ICC Court considers it appropriate to pay 35 per cent of the minimum fee in Expedited
Procedure Provisions cases once the case management conference has been held, and 50 per cent of the minimum fee in other
cases once the Terms of Reference have been established. 9  These thresholds may be viewed as the upper ceilings for fixing
the arbitrators’ fees in the event of early termination of the proceedings.
16-18
The time the co-arbitrators spent in selecting the president does normally not give rise to remuneration by the ICC Court, in
case the matter settles or is not pursued for some other reason prior to the file transmission.
Footnotes
5
Such as, e.g. an increase of the advance on costs, the granting of an advance on costs to the arbitrators, deciding upon
the challenge or replacement of an arbitrator, to mention but a few.
6
See para.11-38.
7
Sometimes, several weeks, if not months, may have passed since the arbitrator first submitted the Statement of
Acceptance, Availability, Impartiality and Independence.
8
See in this context the new art.17(1), discussed in paras 17-5–17-6.
9
See Part XIV D of the 2021 ICC Note (at para.186), Doc.3.1.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
