Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638634 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section A. - Background
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 5 - Powers, Duties, and Jurisdiction of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section A. - Background
(a) Introduction
5. 01
An arbitral tribunal established to determine an international dispute operates in an entirely different context from that of a
judge sitting in a national court. Judges sit in a legal environment that clearly defines the extent of their powers and duties.
They are generally given full immunity in respect of any potential liability arising out of the conduct of their judicial function.
Their jurisdiction, and the extent to which decisions in relation to jurisdiction may be reviewed by an appellate court, are clearly
established in the law governing the proceedings.
5. 02
The position differs in arbitration—particularly in international arbitration, in which the powers, duties, and jurisdiction of an
arbitral tribunal arise from a complex mixture of the will of the parties, the law governing the arbitration agreement, the law of
the place of arbitration, 1  and the law of the place in which recognition or enforcement of the award may be sought.
(b) Practical considerations
5. 03
A balance must be struck between the sanctions that may be imposed on arbitrators who carry out their functions in a careless
or improper manner and the equally necessary requirement that an arbitral tribunal be free to perform its task without constantly
‘looking over its shoulder’ in the fear of being challenged by means of legal process. On one view, it may be argued that
arbitrators should be given virtually unlimited powers, in order to adapt the process to the dispute in question, and to encourage
speed and effectiveness in the arbitral process. However, the requirements of public policy, whether national or international, 2
make some control necessary, so as to ensure that the parties are not without recourse if the arbitral tribunal acts beyond its
jurisdiction, 3  treats the parties unequally, or fails to conduct a fair hearing.
5. 04
The system for the protection of parties against excesses on the part of arbitral tribunals is usually contained in the framework
for recourse against the award itself, or at the moment of recognition and enforcement. 4  However, arbitrators may be removed
for certain types of wrongful conduct during the arbitral process pursuant to the rules of an applicable arbitral institution, 5  or
under the law governing the arbitration 6  by an application to the courts of the country in which the arbitration has its seat.
5. 05
The powers and duties of an arbitral tribunal are also closely linked to the question of its jurisdiction (particularly in defining
the extent of that jurisdiction) and the difficult question of determining the validity of the arbitration agreement. Before turning
to the question of the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal to decide the particular dispute before it, the powers and duties of the
arbitral tribunal will be considered.

Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638634 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
1
Or, exceptionally, the law to which the parties have agreed to subject the arbitration. See Chapter 3.
2
See Chapter 10, paragraphs 10.81ff.
3
See Chapter 10.
4
For further discussion of this subject, see Chapter 11.
5
For instance, under the ICC Rules, Art. 15.2, the ICC Court may remove an arbitrator for not fulfilling his or her functions
in accordance with the Rules or within the prescribed time limit.
6
For instance, under the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 24, the English court may remove an arbitrator for ‘justifiable
doubts’ as to that arbitrator’s impartiality.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
