Case management conference within 15 days of..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Case management conference within 15 days of transmission of
file
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Case management conference within 15 days of transmission of file
30-44
Pursuant to art.3(3) of App.VI, the (first) case management conference must take place no later than 15 days after the date of
transmission of the file to the Tribunal. The same article states that the ICC Court may extend this time limit, but only “pursuant
to a reasoned request from the Tribunal or on its own initiative if it decides it is necessary to do so”.
30-45
This provision is coherent with the overall purpose of the Expedited Procedure Provisions, which is to complete arbitration
proceedings in a six-month period of time. Under art.24(4) of the ICC Rules, the case management conference may be conducted
“through a meeting in person, by video-conference, telephone or similar means of communication”. However, in practice, having
an in-person meeting within 15 days will in most instances only be possible where all participants reside close to each other.
Where parties and/or their counsel and the sole arbitrator are located in different countries or even on different continents, it
may be difficult to comply with this deadline. Public or religious holidays or prior professional commitments may at times make
it difficult to schedule and conduct even a simple meaningful conference call. Besides, arbitrators acting under the Expedited
Procedure Provisions will need some time to study the file and to properly prepare the case management conference (e.g., by
preparing a draft procedural timetable and draft procedural order). Since the six-month time limit for issuing the award starts
from the date of the case management conference, it will be of utmost importance to adopt the procedural timetable during the
course of the case management conference, preferably by leaving some room for flexibility. 668
Footnotes
668
Regarding the latter point, see Böckstiegel, “Case Management by Arbitrators: Experiences and Suggestions” in: Liber
Amicorum R. Briner, op. cit., p.115 (120).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
