Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section D. - Jurisdiction
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 5 - Powers, Duties, and Jurisdiction of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section D. - Jurisdiction
(a) Introduction
5. 97
An arbitral tribunal may only validly resolve those disputes that the parties have agreed that it should resolve. This rule is an
inevitable and proper consequence of the voluntary nature of arbitration. It is the parties who give to a private tribunal the
authority to decide disputes between them, and the arbitral tribunal must take care to stay within the terms of this authority. The
rule to this effect is expressed in several different ways. Sometimes, it is said that an arbitral tribunal must conform to the mission
entrusted to it, 171  or that it must not exceed its mandate, or that it must stay within its terms of reference, 172  competence, or
authority. Another way of expressing the rule (which is followed in this volume) is to state that an arbitral tribunal must not
exceed its jurisdiction (this term being used in the sense of mandate, competence, or authority).
5. 98
National laws and the international conventions on arbitration emphasise how important it is that an arbitral tribunal should not
exceed its jurisdiction. In French law, for example, an award may be challenged where ‘the arbitral tribunal wrongly upheld
or declined jurisdiction’. 173  Internationally, the New York Convention provides that recognition and enforcement of an award
may be refused on proof that ‘[t] he award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the
submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration [ … ]’. 174
(b) Challenges to jurisdiction
5. 99
A challenge to the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal may be partial or total. A partial challenge raises the question of whether
certain (but not all) of the claims or counterclaims that have been submitted to the arbitral tribunal are within its jurisdiction. A
challenge of this kind does not amount to a fundamental attack on the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. It is usually dependent
on whether a particular matter referred to arbitration falls within the scope of the arbitration agreement. A total challenge, by
contrast, questions the whole basis upon which the arbitral tribunal is acting.
(i) Partial challenge
5. 100
A partial challenge, as we have just indicated, exists where it is asserted that some of the claims (or counterclaims) that have
been brought before the arbitral tribunal do not properly come within its jurisdiction. For instance, a construction contract
may require all claims for varied or additional work to be decided by an engineer before being referred to arbitration. If a
claimant brings certain claims without asking or waiting for the engineer’s decision, the respondent may argue that the failure
to do so means that the claims concerned were not properly submitted to arbitration and so were not within the jurisdiction of
the arbitral tribunal. Similar issues have been tested in ICSID arbitrations, in which there is usually a requirement to notify
disputes for the purpose of seeking an amicable settlement for a period before commencing an arbitration. Respondent states
have often argued that certain claims fall outside the parameters of the originally notified dispute. 175

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
5. 101
It is possible to cure such a lack of jurisdiction by agreement of the parties. Even if certain claims or counterclaims are outside
the scope of the initial reference to arbitration, the parties may agree that new matters should be brought within the arbitration.
By signing an agreement to this effect, they may effectively bring new claims within the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal.
This is not always as straightforward as might appear: under some arbitration rules, where the arbitral process has already
begun, new claims may be added only with the permission of the arbitral tribunal. 176
5. 102
Nevertheless, there are many cases in which the other party objects to new claims being brought into the arbitration and
has good legal grounds for its objection. In these cases (and indeed in any case in which it seems that it may be exceeding
its jurisdiction), the arbitral tribunal should proceed with caution. This issue is of particular concern where there are two or
more contracts. In one case, a claim was brought before an arbitral tribunal constituted under the ICC Rules pursuant to a
loan agreement. The loan agreement did not specify the seat of the arbitration and Paris was agreed by the parties. In its
counterclaim, the respondent raised claims under a second loan agreement between the same parties, which provided for an
ICC arbitration with a seat in Madrid. The claimant objected to the inclusion of the counterclaim brought under the second
loan agreement and noted that the counterclaim was incompatible with the arbitration in light of the different seat. The arbitral
tribunal nevertheless proceeded to review the claim under the second loan within the original arbitration, on the basis that the
two loans were commercially connected. The claimant successfully set aside the award on the basis that the tribunal lacked
jurisdiction over the second loan agreement due to the incompatible seats. 177  It is apparent that if a tribunal does exceed its
jurisdiction, its award will be imperilled, and may be set aside or refused recognition and enforcement in whole or in part
by a competent court. 178
(ii) Total challenge
5. 103
A total challenge to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal raises the fundamental question of whether there is a valid
arbitration agreement at all. Total challenges to jurisdiction are likely to arise in practice only where the authority (or purported
authority) of the arbitral tribunal is derived from a pre-dispute arbitration clause, since an arbitral tribunal that derives its
authority from a post-dispute submission agreement will, by definition, have agreed to give the arbitral tribunal jurisdiction
to determine specific disputes.
5. 104
The grounds for a challenge to jurisdiction are often related to the basic elements of arbitration clauses, as discussed in
Chapter 2. One of the alleged parties to an arbitration agreement may argue that it is not bound by the agreement, because
the arbitration clause was contained in a document to which it had not consented, or it may claim that the legal entity signing
the agreement was a different legal person. Alternatively, it may argue that the arbitration agreement is not an agreement
in writing, 179  or that the whole dispute in issue is outside the scope of the arbitration agreement, or not arbitrable under
the applicable law. The respondent may assert that the claim is time-barred, or that preconditions to arbitration have not
been performed, or that the arbitration clause is otherwise inoperative or incapable of being performed. Challenges to the
jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal of this type raise questions as to who should decide the challenge—the arbitral tribunal
or a national court—and whether a ruling on jurisdiction by the arbitral tribunal may be reviewed by a national court and
at what stage.
(c) Autonomy (or separability) of the arbitration clause
5. 105
The question of whether a total challenge to jurisdiction should be decided by the arbitral tribunal itself, or by the relevant
court, is an important one. The answer depends on whether an arbitration clause should be regarded as having a separate and
independent existence from the agreement in which it is included. If such a clause did not have an independent existence, an

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
unwilling party could seek to avoid arbitration by simply alleging that the arbitration clause in the contract was invalid because
the contract containing the arbitration agreement was itself invalid.
5. 106
This concern has been addressed by most jurisdictions by means of the adoption of what is known as the ‘doctrine of
separability’. 180  In other words, an arbitration clause is considered to be a separate and autonomous agreement from the contract
in which it is contained. Consequently, its validity does not depend on the validity of the contract as a whole. 181  By surviving
termination of the main contract, the clause also constitutes the necessary agreement of the parties that any disputes between
them (even concerning the validity or termination of the contract in which it is contained) should be referred to arbitration. In
this way, it provides a legal basis for the appointment of an arbitral tribunal.
5. 107
In short, if the tribunal is to decide on its own jurisdiction, it must first assume that jurisdiction. This is what the doctrine of
separability allows it to do. It is apparent that the doctrine is, in many ways, a convenient and pragmatic fiction. If the arbitral
tribunal decides that the clause is not a valid agreement to arbitrate, then the basis for its authority disappears. If the clause is not
an enforceable agreement to arbitrate, that authority was never there. Nevertheless, because of its obvious practical advantages,
this doctrine is widely accepted both by arbitration rules and in national laws. 182  The question of separability was reviewed
by the English courts in Fiona Trust & Holding Corporation and ors v Privalov and ors. The case concerned charterparties
made between, inter alia, the claimants and the defendant charterers. The claimants sought to rescind the charterparties and the
arbitration agreements contained within them on the basis they had been procured by bribery. The Court of Appeal, confirming
the doctrine of separability of the arbitration agreement from the underlying contract, held that the arbitration agreement would
continue to apply unless it was directly impeached for some specific reason. 183  On the facts of the case, there was no evidence
to indicate that the bribery impeached the arbitration clause in particular. The House of Lords (now the UK Supreme Court)
upheld the decision of the Court of Appeal, concluding that the principle of separability means that the invalidity or rescission of
the main contract does not necessarily entail the invalidity or rescission of the arbitration agreement: the arbitration agreement
must be treated as a distinct agreement and can be void or voidable only on grounds that relate directly to the arbitration
agreement. 184  The validity, existence, or effectiveness of the arbitration agreement is not dependent upon the effectiveness,
existence, or validity of the underlying substantive contract unless the parties have agreed to this. 185  The doctrine of separability
requires direct impeachment of the arbitration agreement before it can be set aside. This is an exacting test. 186
5. 108
But a decision that the arbitration clause is legally separate from the main contract does not answer the procedural question: if
a challenge to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal is made, by whom is the challenge to be determined? Is it to be determined
by the arbitral tribunal itself, by an arbitral institution, by an appointing authority, or by a court of competent jurisdiction?
(i) Who judges?
5. 109
It is generally accepted that an arbitral tribunal has power to investigate its own jurisdiction. This is a power inherent in the
appointment of an arbitral tribunal. Indeed, it is an essential power if the arbitral tribunal is to carry out its task properly. An
arbitral tribunal must be able to look at the arbitration agreement, the terms of its appointment, and any relevant evidence
in order to decide whether or not a particular claim, or series of claims, comes within its jurisdiction. The arbitral tribunal’s
decision on the issue may be reviewed subsequently by a competent national court—but it is commonly accepted that this
does not prevent the tribunal from making the decision in the first place. 187
(ii) Competence-competence
5. 110

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
The usual practice under modern international and institutional rules of arbitration is to spell out in express terms the power
of an arbitral tribunal to decide upon its own jurisdiction, or (as it is often put) its competence to decide upon its own
competence. 188  For example, Article 23.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules provides:
The arbitral tribunal shall have the power to rule on its own jurisdiction, including any objections with
respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement. For that purpose, an arbitration clause that
forms part of a contract shall be treated as an agreement independent of the other terms of the contract.
A decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null shall not entail automatically the invalidity of
the arbitration clause.
5. 111
Similarly, under Article 6.9 of the ICC Rules:
Unless otherwise agreed, the arbitral tribunal shall not cease to have jurisdiction by reason of any allegation
that the contract is non-existent or null and void, provided that the arbitral tribunal upholds the validity of
the arbitration agreement. The arbitral tribunal shall continue to have jurisdiction to determine the parties’
respective rights and to decide their claims and pleas even though the contract itself may be non-existent
or null and void.
5. 112
The ICC process provides for the possibility of a provisional check on the prima facie existence of the arbitration agreement
by the ICC Court, at the discretion of the Secretary-General, who may refer the case to the Court for decision. 189  If the Court
is satisfied that such an agreement may exist, ‘the arbitration shall proceed’ and ‘any decision as to the jurisdiction of the
arbitral tribunal [ … ] shall then be taken by the arbitral tribunal itself ’. If the Court is not so satisfied, then the arbitration
cannot proceed under the ICC Rules in respect of the parties or claims in question.
5. 113
Most modern national laws governing international arbitration also spell out the power of an arbitral tribunal to rule on its
own jurisdiction. 190  For example, Article 16(1) of the Model Law provides that:
The arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including any objections with respect to the existence
or validity of the arbitration agreement. For that purpose, an arbitration clause which forms part of a
contract shall be treated as an agreement independent of the other terms of the contract. A decision by the
arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not entail ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitration
clause. 191
Support of the principle has not, however, been universal. In India, a series of cases appeared to reject the concept, but more
recent case law from the Indian Supreme Court suggests that the approach is changing. 192  Rulings by French and Brazilian
courts have also nuanced the competence-competence principle. While observing that an arbitral tribunal has priority to
decide on its own jurisdiction and to analyse the validity of the arbitration clause, Brazil’s highest court also noted that
every rule has its exceptions. 193  In that case, the Court held that a national court ‘may in cases where a “pathological”, i.e.,
manifestly illegal, arbitration agreement is prima facie identified, declare the nullity of this agreement, regardless of the state
of the arbitration proceedings’. 194  A recent decision from the Court of Cassation departed from French case law that had
long concluded that the competence-competence principle applies to international consumer contracts. 195  Instead, the Court
held that the application of the competence-competence principle in an international contract to which a consumer is a party
cannot result in the consumer being effectively deprived of the consumer-protection provisions of European law. 196

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
5. 114
As identified earlier, there are essentially two elements to the separability rule: first, that an arbitral tribunal can rule upon
its own jurisdiction; and secondly, that, for this purpose, the arbitration clause is separate and independent from the terms of
the contract containing the transaction between the parties. Most countries, including those that have not adopted the Model
Law, embrace both propositions. 197  However, the two are inter-related, not identical. To understand the real scope of an
arbitrator’s power in any given country, it is always important to check whether both propositions appear in its national law.
In the English Arbitration Act 1996, for example, the competence of an arbitral tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction is
established in section 30; the separability of the arbitration clauseis established in section 7. The relationship between the
two provisions was addressed in Vee Networks Ltd v Econet Wireless International Ltd. 198  The case held that separability, as
provided in section 7, insulates the arbitration agreement from the underlying contract, and that ‘competence-competence’,
as provided in section 30, reflects the doctrine of separability, but leaves intact the requirement that the arbitration agreement
itself should be valid and binding. 199
(iii) Limitations on jurisdiction
5. 115
In addition to checking the applicable rules of procedure that set out the power of an arbitral tribunal to decide on its own
jurisdiction, parties should examine carefully the law of the arbitral seat to establish to what extent those powers may be
limited by the public policy of the seat. Further, whilst the conventions and rules referred to may define ‘the jurisdiction of
the arbitrators’, that jurisdiction is derived not from any international source, but from the arbitration agreement—and the
arbitration agreement, as we have previously stated, can confer only powers that are permissible under the law applicable to
the arbitration agreement and under the lex arbitri. 200
(iv) Award made without jurisdiction
5. 116
The nullity of an award in the absence of a valid arbitration agreement is recognised both in national laws and in the
international conventions governing arbitration. In the Model Law, for example, one of the limited cases in which it is possible
to challenge an award is that in which ‘the [arbitration] agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected
to it [ … ]’. 201  Likewise, under the New York Convention, recognition and enforcement of an award may be refused if the
arbitration agreement ‘is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under
the law of the country where the award was made’. 202  This apparent consistency between the applicable tests at the setting
aside and enforcement stages has not avoided conflict. For example, in Dallah v Pakistan, 203  the UK Supreme Court and
the Paris Court of Appeal reached opposite conclusions under French law regarding the validity of an ICC award that had
been rendered by an arbitral tribunal in Paris. The Supreme Court refused to enforce the award, finding that under French law
(based on expert evidence) the arbitral tribunal had incorrectly assumed jurisdiction over the government of Pakistan. But,
shortly thereafter, the Paris Court of Appeal upheld the tribunal’s decision that it had jurisdiction, which was based on its
determination that the contract was properly extended to the government as a non-signatory given the heavy involvement of
the government during the negotiation of the contract. 204  In so finding, the Paris Court of Appeal rejected the government’s
application to annul the award. 205
(d) Court control
5. 117
A decision given by an arbitral tribunal as to its jurisdiction is subject to control by the courts of law, which in this respect have
the final word. The relevant procedure and burden of proof vary from country to country, and sometimes even within countries.

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
In practice, recourse to the courts on issues of jurisdiction is likely to take place at one of three stages: at the beginning of the
arbitral process; during the course of the process; or following the issuance of the award. These different stages, and the options
open both to the arbitral tribunal and to the challenging party, are considered later in this chapter. First, however, it is necessary
to review the question of concurrent court control.
(i) Concurrent control
5. 118
Any challenge to jurisdiction during the course of the arbitral proceedings is usually made to the arbitral tribunal itself. The
arbitral tribunal will decide whether to ‘bifurcate’ the jurisdictional objection, asking for separate pleadings and holding a
hearing before issuing an interim award on jurisdiction, or to hear the jurisdictional objection as part of the case as a whole,
which will then be addressed as part of the final award. In many jurisdictions, an interim award on jurisdiction may be
challenged immediately in the local courts, 206  which permits a challenge to the arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction before any
award on the merits has been issued. 207  By this means, a final decision on the issue of jurisdiction may be obtained at an early
stage in the arbitral proceedings. One notable exception is the ICSID regime, under which no application to local courts to
review a jurisdictional decision is possible and the internal annulment process applies only in respect of final awards, which
must ‘deal with every question submitted to the Tribunal’. 208  The annulment process is consequently open only in respect
of negative jurisdictional decisions that finally dispose of the dispute. 209
5. 119
The system under which a national court may review the issue of jurisdiction before the arbitral tribunal has issued a final
award on the merits is known as ‘concurrent control’. The advantage of this system is that it will save the cost and time of
preparing a case on the merits if the court denies arbitral jurisdiction. There are broadly two arguments against concurrent
control. First, it is argued that recourse to the courts during the course of arbitral proceedings should not be encouraged, since
arbitral proceedings should, as far as possible, be conducted without outside ‘interference’. Secondly, and more pragmatically,
it is argued that to allow recourse to the courts during the course of an arbitration is likely to encourage delaying tactics on the
part of a reluctant respondent. This question was much debated during the preparation of the Model Law—but the solution
of concurrent control was adopted. 210
(ii) Choices open to the arbitral tribunal
5. 120
As the practice of international arbitration has become more sophisticated, challenges to the jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals
have become more frequent. An arbitral tribunal faced with a challenge to its jurisdiction will need to decide whether to
examine the jurisdictional issue separately and preliminarily or to deal with it as part of the case as a whole (referred to as
‘joining the issue to the merits’).
5. 121
Typically, once a claimant has made its case by way of a full statement of the claim with accompanying documents, witness
statements, and expert reports, a tribunal will establish a brief deadline within which the respondent is allowed to indicate
whether it wishes to seek the preliminary hearing of any jurisdictional objections it may have through bifurcation of the
proceedings. If the respondent uses that opportunity, the claimant will be given the opportunity to respond on the bifurcation
request and the tribunal will decide whether the case on the merits should be suspended in order to address the jurisdictional
question separately. In the case of bifurcation, the respondent will submit its objections to jurisdiction (to which the claimant
will be permitted to respond). A further round of pleadings may then follow and a hearing on jurisdiction will be held and a
jurisdictional decision or award issued. On the other hand, if the tribunal denies the request to bifurcate, the respondent will
make its objection to jurisdiction as part of its overall defence on the merits of the case and the issue will be argued with
the merits and decided in a final award.
5. 122

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
The overarching question for the tribunal is whether bifurcation of the jurisdictional objection(s) will lead to procedural
efficiency. For example, the tribunal in Eco Oro v Colombia explained that, in deciding whether to bifurcate, the tribunal
‘should seek to determine what will best serve the Parties and the sound administration of justice, in particular with respect
to procedural efficiency’. 211  In the same vein, the proposed amendments to the ICSID Rules explicitly require the tribunal
to consider whether bifurcation ‘would materially reduce the time and cost of the proceeding; determination of the questions
to be bifurcated would dispose of all or a substantial portion of the dispute; and whether the questions to be addressed in
separate phases of the proceeding are so intertwined as to make bifurcation impractical’. 212  Similarly, case law has identified
certain factors to be considered by a tribunal when exercising its discretion to decide whether a request for bifurcation is
justified or not, namely:
 
•whether the objection is prima facie serious and substantial;
 
•whether the objection is closely intertwined with the merits of the claim;
 
•whether the objection is capable of disposing of the entire case; and
 
•whether procedural economy is served by dealing with the objection prior to the merits. 213
5. 123
Any award on jurisdiction made by an arbitral tribunal, whether as an interim or final award, is binding on the parties to the
arbitration. However, it may be set aside by a competent court, and it may be refused recognition or enforcement. This is the
principle adopted in the Model Law with regard to both setting aside and refusal of recognition or enforcement. 214  It is also
the principle adopted in the New York Convention with regard to the recognition and enforcement of awards. 215
(e) Procedural aspects of resolving issues of jurisdiction
5. 124
Objections to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal are usually raised by a respondent in the early stages of the arbitration
(or by a claimant in relation to any counterclaims). 216  Indeed, most institutional rules require that an objection be raised no
later than the statement of defence, or (for counterclaims) in the reply to the counterclaim. 217  This is a sensible and practical
provision. It is undesirable that a party who feels that the case is beginning to go against it should be able to raise objections
to jurisdiction at a late stage of the proceedings. National laws often support this position. Under section 31(1) of the English
Arbitration Act 1996, an objection to jurisdiction cannot be raised later than ‘the time [the party raising the objection] takes
the first step in the proceedings to contest the merits’. 218  In Venezuela, any objection to jurisdiction has to be raised within
five business days of the procedural hearing. 219
(f) Options open to the respondent
5. 125
A respondent has four methods of challenging the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal established contrary to its assertion that
the tribunal has no jurisdiction. It may:
 
•boycott the arbitration;
 
•raise its objections with the tribunal;
 
•apply to the national court to resolve the issue; or
 
•challenge the award, once it has been made.

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
(i) Boycott the arbitration
5. 126
The first, and most extreme course of action, is to boycott the arbitration altogether. In this event, the arbitration will proceed
on an ex parte basis and the respondent will seek to set aside the award, or to resist enforcement on the grounds of lack of
jurisdiction, after the final award has been issued. The Libyan government took this course in the oil nationalisation cases 220
after writing to the arbitrator in each case to contend that the arbitral proceedings were invalid. Liberia behaved in the same
way in Letco v Liberia before an ICSID tribunal. 221  It is ill-advised, since, provided that the party has been properly notified
of the constitution of the tribunal and of relevant procedural deadlines and hearings, an award will be enforceable against
it notwithstanding its non-participation. Further, a costs award against the recalcitrant party is likely. 222  This situation is
increasingly rare, because most parties (both states and private parties) are advised about the adverse consequences of such
conduct.
(ii) Raise objections with the arbitral tribunal
5. 127
The second course of action (which is the most conventional) is to raise objections with the arbitral tribunal itself and to request
bifurcation of the jurisdictional question. This possibility, and the ways of dealing with it, has already been discussed, above.
(iii) Apply to a national court
5. 128
The third course of action is for the respondent to apply to the relevant court to resolve the issue. There are various ways
in which this may be done. The respondent may, for example, seek an injunction or similar remedy to restrain the arbitral
tribunal from proceeding (an ‘anti-arbitration injunction’), or the respondent may seek a declaration to the effect that the
arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction in respect of the particular claim(s) put forward by the claimant (for example, on
the basis that there was no valid arbitration agreement). Alternatively, the respondent may take the offensive and commence
court litigation in respect of the matters in dispute. The claimant in the arbitration would presumably defend such a challenge
to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal by seeking to have the arbitration agreement enforced, relying on Article II of the
New York Convention, or the relevant provision of domestic law implementing the New York Convention. 223
5. 129
Such challenges to the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal are usually addressed to the courts at the seat of arbitration, if these
courts have power to intervene concurrently in an international arbitration during the course of the proceedings. 224  The main
disadvantage for a respondent who adopts this course is the risk of an adverse court decision upholding arbitral jurisdiction.
This will enhance the standing of the arbitration and make it more difficult to challenge the award subsequently, or to resist
enforcement of any subsequent award against the respondent on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction.
(iv) Attack the award
5. 130
The fourth course of action is for the respondent to participate in the arbitration and to remain passive until after the final
award has been issued by the arbitral tribunal. It may then either challenge the award in the courts of the country in which the
arbitration took place or refuse to implement the award and wait for the successful claimant to attempt to enforce it. When
an action for enforcement is taken, the losing party might then argue the objections to jurisdiction as a ground for refusal
of enforcement. The disadvantage of this tactic is that most systems of law will consider a failure to raise an objection to

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
jurisdiction promptly as a waiver of the objection, particularly where the applicable institutional rules require that it be made
at a particular phase of the arbitration. 225
(v) A combined approach
5. 131
What, then, is the reluctant party to do when requested to take part in an arbitration under an agreement that it considers to
be non-existent or invalid? It should take part in the proceedings as respondent and raise the matter with the arbitral tribunal
itself at the earliest possible stage; it should insist that all objections be fully argued before the arbitral tribunal and contend
that the determination of these objections should be the subject of an interim award. If the arbitral tribunal bifurcates the
jurisdictional issue but upholds its own jurisdiction, the respondent should continue to participate in the arbitration, having
expressly reserved its position in relation to the issue of jurisdiction, so that this issue may be considered again after the final
award is issued. If the tribunal does not bifurcate the issue, the respondent should argue the objection fully in its pleadings
in the case and at the final hearing. If the final award confirms the jurisdiction of the tribunal, the respondent may either
challenge the award in the courts of the place of arbitration on the basis of the absence of a valid arbitration agreement (or
other relevant local ground), or by resisting attempts to obtain recognition or enforcement of the award by asserting Article
V of the New York Convention that the arbitration agreement is not valid or addresses a difference beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration. 226
(vi) Form of court intervention
5. 132
Although a national court’s role in reviewing a tribunal’s award on jurisdiction is well established, the type of intervention
that the court is meant to undertake is not so clear. Is the court to have a de novo hearing, considering the jurisdictional
question afresh, or is it merely to review the tribunal’s decision, applying the same deferential standard as it would apply to
an award on the merits? The United States has adopted a distinction depending on the nature of the jurisdictional decision.
If jurisdiction is denied by the arbitral tribunal based upon a failure to comply with a procedural precondition (what the US
courts call ‘procedural arbitrability’ and other jurisdictions would call ‘admissibility’), the US Supreme Court has held that
the arbitrators must be given deference. This refers to the question ‘when’ there is a duty to arbitrate. If, on the other hand,
jurisdiction has been denied based on an alleged absence of an arbitration agreement, failure of the dispute to fall within the
scope of the arbitration agreement, or lack of arbitrability of the dispute given its nature (what the US courts call ‘substantive
arbitrability’), then the court may exercise a de novo review. 227  The court in that case will have the ultimate right to answer
the question of ‘whether’ there is a duty to arbitrate.
5. 133
This issue was reviewed in BG Group v Argentina, 228  in which an arbitration under the United Kingdom–Argentina BIT
had taken place under the UNCITRAL Rules with Washington, DC as the seat of the arbitration. Following BG’s victory in
the arbitration, Argentina challenged the award before the competent District Court of the District of Columbia, alleging that
the arbitrators had no jurisdiction because the claimant had not complied with the BIT’s requirement of first submitting the
dispute to the courts of Argentina for eighteen months (a requirement that did not require any decision from the courts and
under which, even if a decision were issued, the right to arbitrate remained). 229  The arbitral tribunal had analysed and rejected
this argument, based on the futility of the requirement in light of restrictions on accessing the Argentine courts and certain
provisions of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. The District Court rejected the challenge to the award.
However, the District of Columbia Court of Appeals upheld the challenge, by reviewing the treaty directly and deciding that
the Court need not show deference to the arbitrators’ views, but could review the question de novo. BG successfully appealed
to the US Supreme Court, which confirmed that the eighteen-month requirement was simply a procedural precondition or
threshold provision, since the dispute could be definitively resolved only by arbitration. As a consequence, it was no different
from any other procedural precondition, since it did not affect ‘whether’ the dispute could be arbitrated, but only ‘when’ it
could be arbitrated. In accordance with existing case law on procedural preconditions, arbitrators should be given deference
and a de novo analysis of the question was not permissible.

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
(g) International agreements on the jurisdiction of national courts
5. 134
Whilst any challenge to an arbitral award should be brought before the courts of the seat of the arbitration, the proper judicial
forum for other applications may be less clear, particularly where jurisdictional treaties apply. Within the EU, for example,
a measure of uniformity as to which state courts may accept jurisdiction was originally established by the 2001 Brussels
Regulation. 230  Article 1(2)(d) of the Regulation specifically excluded arbitrations from the application of the Regulation.
Article 2 established a basic rule (subject to limited exceptions) that persons shall be sued in the courts of the state in which
they are domiciled. A potential conflict consequently arose when a legal action was brought in one of the member states, but
there was a claim that the dispute was covered by an arbitration clause providing for arbitration in a different member state. The
party seeking to avoid arbitration might have claimed that there was no binding arbitration agreement, and that therefore the
court of the defendant’s domicile had jurisdiction and not the courts at the seat of the arbitration. The other party might have
replied that a question as to the validity of an arbitration agreement was itself excluded from the application of the Regulation,
under Article 1(2), as being connected with an arbitration.
5. 135
This situation occurred in the Marc Rich case, 231  in which an English court was asked to rule on the validity of an arbitration
agreement as part of the process of considering an application for support of the arbitral process (in the appointment of an
arbitrator), while simultaneously an Italian court (which would have had jurisdiction under the Regulation were it not for the
arbitration agreement) was asked to act as if no valid arbitration agreement existed. The European Court of Justice (ECJ)
held that the arbitration exclusion of the (then) Brussels Convention (later Art. 1(2)(d) of the Brussels Regulation) extended
to litigation before a national court in respect of the arbitrator. As a consequence, it was admissible for the English courts to
intervene in the appointment of an arbitrator, notwithstanding the domicile of the defendant in Italy. This appears to be sound.
The exclusion exception of Article 1(2)(d) would be deprived of any real meaning if the Regulation were to apply to applications
in support of arbitration.
5. 136
Another area of tension between the EU jurisdiction regime and the arbitration exception was exposed in Van Uden Maritime
v Deco-Line. 232  The claimant was a Dutch corporation, which had started an arbitration against a German respondent in the
Netherlands for monies due under a charterparty. The claimant also sought an interim payment from the national courts in the
Netherlands pursuant to the Netherlands Arbitration Act 1986. The Hoge Raad of the Netherlands referred the question to the
ECJ as to whether it had jurisdiction to make a provisional order pending determination of a dispute by an arbitral tribunal on
the basis of Article 24 of the Brussels Convention (later Art. 31 of the Brussels Regulation), which states:
Application may be made to the courts of a Contracting State for such provisional, including protective, measures
as may be available under the law of that State, even if, under this Convention, the courts of another Contracting
State have jurisdiction as to the substance of the matter.
5. 137
The respondent argued that there was no such jurisdiction, since the arbitration exception applied. The ECJ disagreed, holding
that:
[P]rovisional measures are not in principle ancillary to arbitration proceedings but are ordered in parallel to such
proceedings and are intended as measures of support. They concern not arbitration as such but the protection of
a wide variety of rights. 233
As a consequence, such applications benefited from the protection of the Brussels Regulation such that there could be no
concurrent proceedings (Arts 21–23). Further, an application for interim measures from an EU national court in support of an
arbitration could be enforced under the Brussels Regulation in any other court in the EU. This was a strong incentive to seek
such measures, since interim measures from a national court might not be enforced automatically elsewhere pursuant to the
New York Convention.

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
5. 138
The same area of conflict was addressed in the case of Allianz SpA and anor v West Tankers Inc. West Tankers Inc. had chartered
a vessel to Erg SpA pursuant to a charterparty that provided for disputes to be resolved by arbitration in England. The vessel
had collided with a jetty in an Italian port. Erg claimed compensation from its insurer up to the limit of its insurance cover
and commenced arbitration proceedings in London against West Tankers for the excess. West Tankers denied liability for the
damage caused by the collision. Having paid Erg compensation under the insurance policies for the loss that it had suffered,
the insurer brought proceedings against West Tankers before the Italian courts in order to recover the sums that it had paid
to Erg, based on its statutory right of subrogation. West Tankers raised an objection of lack of jurisdiction on the basis of the
existence of the arbitration agreement.
5. 139
In parallel, West Tankers brought proceedings before the English courts, seeking a declaration that the dispute with the insurer
was to be settled by arbitration pursuant to the arbitration agreement and an ‘anti-suit’ injunction restraining the insurer from
pursuing the proceedings commenced before the Italian courts. The English High Court upheld West Tankers’ claims and granted
the anti-suit injunction sought against the insurer. 234  The latter appealed against that judgment to the House of Lords (now the
UK Supreme Court), arguing that the grant of such an injunction was contrary to the Brussels Regulation, since it had a right
to bring a claim in the Italian courts, and if the Italian courts took jurisdiction, that should be the end of the matter.
5. 140
The House of Lords first referred to judgments in which it was held that an anti-suit injunction restraining a party from
commencing or continuing proceedings in a court of another member state cannot be compatible with the system established by
the Brussels Regulation, even where it is granted by the court having jurisdiction under that regulation. 235  That is because the
Brussels Regulation provided a complete set of uniform rules on the allocation of jurisdiction between the courts of the member
states, which must trust each other to apply those rules correctly. However, that principle could not, in the view of the House
of Lords, be extended to arbitration, which was excluded from the scope of the Brussels Regulation by virtue of Article 1(2)
(d). Since there was no set of uniform rules in relation to arbitration, it was clear from the Marc Rich case that the exclusion
in Article 1(2)(d) applied both to arbitration proceedings and legal proceedings in relation to arbitration. As a consequence, the
House of Lords concluded that an anti-suit injunction addressed to the Italian court would not infringe the regulation. However,
it stayed its proceedings, pending a preliminary ruling to address the question: ‘Is it consistent with Regulation No. 44/2001
for a court of a Member State to make an order to restrain a person from commencing or continuing proceedings in another
Member State on the ground that such proceedings are in breach of an arbitration agreement?’
5. 141
The ECJ concluded that, although the subject matter of the proceedings was arbitration (and thus outside of the scope of
the Brussels Regulation), an anti-suit injunction against a court of another member state that considered it had validly taken
jurisdiction under the Brussels Regulation would have consequences that could undermine its effectiveness. 236  This was
particularly so where proceedings were seeking to prevent the exercise by the courts of a member state of their jurisdictional
privileges under the Brussels Regulation. In these circumstances, it was exclusively a matter for the courts first seized of the
dispute (in this case, the Italian courts) to determine the validity of an arbitration agreement relied upon by a respondent in order
to contest its jurisdiction. Otherwise, it would amount to stripping that court of the power to determine its own jurisdiction under
the Brussels Regulation. Such anti-suit injunctions were consequently held to be incompatible with the Brussels Regulation.
The ECJ noted too that this solution was consistent with Article II(3) of the New York Convention, which vests the courts of a
state seized of a matter in respect of which an arbitration agreement exists with the power to refer the matter to arbitration.
5. 142
The European Court’s decision in the West Tankers case has been widely criticised by commentators for not taking into account
the fundamental principles of arbitration law and the reality of arbitral practice—namely, that parties select specific jurisdictions
as seats for their arbitrations because of their arbitration-friendly judicial systems. 237  It is argued that parties expect the national
courts at the seat of the arbitration to enforce agreements to arbitrate and to protect their supervisory jurisdiction. Nevertheless,
some commentators have suggested that courts at the seat of the arbitration may continue to enforce arbitration agreements by
alternative means, such as declaring the validity of the arbitration agreement, ordering its specific performance, or awarding
damages for the breach of agreements to arbitrate. 238

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
5. 143
The scope of the Brussels Regulation was clarified by the superseding Regulation 1215/2012 (the Recast Regulation), 239  which
came into force on 10 January 2015. 240  Article 1(2)(d) of the Recast Regulation continues to exclude arbitrations from its
application, but provides guidance to courts seized of arbitration matters. Recital 12 states that when a member state court is
seized of an action that is subject to an arbitration agreement, the Recast Regulation does not prevent the court from (a) referring
those parties to arbitration, (b) staying or dismissing the proceedings, or (c) examining the validity of the arbitration agreement.
Recital 12 also excludes rulings from member state courts on the validity of arbitration agreements from the recognition and
enforcement regime of the Recast Regulation, regardless of whether the court decided the matter as a principal or incidental
issue. However, if a member state court has determined that an arbitration agreement is invalid, then that court’s judgment on
the substance of the dispute may be recognised or enforced under the Regulation. Recital 12 states that this is without prejudice
to member state courts’ competence to recognise and enforce arbitral awards in accordance with the New York Convention,
‘which takes precedence over’ the Recast Regulation. 241  Finally, Recital 12 provides that the Regulation is not applicable to any
action or ancillary proceedings relating to the establishment of an arbitral tribunal, the powers of the arbitrators, or the conduct
or any other aspect of arbitral procedure, nor to any action or judgment regarding the annulment, review, appeal, recognition,
or enforcement of an arbitral award.
Footnotes
171
See, e.g., French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1457: ‘Arbitrators shall carry out their mission until it is completed.’
172
Under the ICC Rules, Art. 23, an arbitral tribunal must draw up its own ‘terms of reference’ for signature by the parties
and the tribunal, and for approval by the ICC Court, before proceeding with the arbitration.
173
French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1520.1.
174
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(c). It should be pointed out, however, that the possibility of the ‘good’ parts of an
award being separated from the ‘bad’ is explicitly recognised, since this paragraph of the New York Convention goes
on to state that if the decision on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those that were not submitted,
‘that part of the award which contains decisions on matters submitted to arbitration may be recognised and enforced’.
175
These questions have also been referred to as questions of admissibility, that is, have the necessary steps prior to
arbitration been completed. See, e.g., CMS Gas Transmission Co. v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8,
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, 17 July 2003, in which the later claims were considered to have been an evolution
of a dispute already notified. In contrast, in the case of Burlington Resources, Inc. v Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB
08/5, Jurisdictional Decision, 2 June 2010, the tribunal rejected jurisdiction over an unrelated claim that had not been
the subject of prior notification.
176
See, e.g., ICC Rules, Art. 23.4, which allows claims made after the drafting of the terms of reference only in the discretion
of the arbitral tribunal, which shall consider the nature of such new claims, the stage of the arbitration, and other relevant
circumstances.
177
Empresa de Telecomunicaciones de Cuba SA (ETECSA) v Telefonica Antillana SA and SNC Banco Nacional de
Comercio Exterior, Paris cour d’appel, 16 November 2006.
178
In the ETECSA case, although the issue of complaint was the exercise of jurisdiction in relation to the second loan
agreement, the Paris Court of Appeal was unable to sever the part related to the original loan agreement and the entire
award was consequently set aside.
179
See Chapter 2, paragraphs 2.15ff.
180
See Chapter 2 on the doctrine of separability.
181
See, e.g., the UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 23; ICC Rules, Art. 6.9; LCIA Rules, Art. 23; ICDR Rules, Art. 21; Model Law,
Art. 16; English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 7. This is the reason why most authors refer to the ‘law governing the arbitration
agreement’, rather than to the ‘law governing the contract’. An arbitration clause may be valid even if the contract of
which it forms a part is found, under the same law, to be invalid.
182
See Chapter 2, paragraphs 2.107ff.
183
[2007] EWCA Civ 20.
184
[2007] UKHL 40, at [17].
185
Ibid., at [32].

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
186
Ibid., at [35].
187
See, e.g., Insalcor v Prolesa, Uruguay Court of Appeals, Decision No. 65/2018, 24 May 2018, at [II], where the
Court confirmed the principle of competence-competence and referred a dispute to arbitration given the existence of
an arbitration clause in one of the contracts underlying the dispute. While one of the parties was claiming it had not
consented to arbitrate, the Court of Appeals found that, through emails exchanged between the parties pursuant to the
negotiation of the agreement, they had ultimately consented to the terms of the contract including an arbitration clause.
The Court held that it would be ‘useless’ to hear the arguments of the alleged non-signatory party because the arbitral
tribunal and not the court was the proper forum to first decide on jurisdiction.
188
This is sometimes described in a form of shorthand as ‘competence-competence’. It is expressed in German as
Kompetenz/Kompetenz and in French as compétence de la compétence.
189
ICC Rules, Art. 6.3. No guidance is given as to how the Secretary-General is expected to exercise the discretion.
190
See, e.g., Henry Schein, Inc. v Archer & White Sales, Inc., 139 S.Ct. 524, 528 (2019), where the US Supreme Court
held unanimously that the FAA does not contain a ‘wholly groundless’ exception, and that ‘[w]hen the parties’ contract
delegates the arbitrability question to an arbitrator, the courts must respect the parties’ decision as embodied in the
contract’.
191
For a discussion of the competence-competence principle in the United States, see, e.g., Graves and Davydan,
‘Competence-competence and separability—American style’, in Kröll, Mistelis, Perales Viscasillas, and Rogers (eds)
International Arbitration and International Commercial Law: Synergy, Convergence and Evolution (Kluwer Law
International, 2011), pp. 157–178.
192
Concern about the application of the concept in India was voiced by Ray and Sabharwal, ‘Competencecompetence:
An Indian trilogy’ (2007) 22 Mealey’s Intl Arb Rep 15, but this position appears to have softened: see, e.g., Kvaerner
Cementation India Ltd v Bajranglal Aggaral (2012) 5 SCC 214, in which the Supreme Court found that once an
arbitration is initiated, it has no power to rule on the existence or validity of the arbitration clause, and referred the parties
to the arbitrator under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996, s. 16. Similarly, in In World Sport Group (Mauritius)
Ltd v MSM Satellite (Singapore) Ltd (Decision of the Supreme Court dated 24 January 2014 in Civil Appeal No. 895
of 2014), the claimant sought to rescind a contract (and the arbitration agreement it contained) on the basis of fraud and
sought relief before the courts. The Indian Supreme Court held that the claim for fraud should be properly heard in the
first instance by the arbitral tribunal unless the arbitration agreement itself (not the underlying contract) is ‘null and void,
inoperative or incapable of being performed’ and an arbitration agreement does not become ‘inoperative or incapable
of being performed’ simply because the dispute concerning the underlying contract may involve allegations of fraud.
However, the issue is not fully resolved as a recent single judge decision in favour of competence-competence was
overruled by the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court, holding that the court has an inherent jurisdiction to determine
if a dispute is arbitrable—see Dr. Bina Modi v Lalit Kumar and ors, 2020 SCC OnLine Del 1678. For a discussion of
the turbulent story of competence-competence in the Indian courts see Tyagi, ‘The Muddy Waters of Anti-Arbitration
Injunctions in India’, American Review of International Arbitration Blog, 17 November 2021.
193
STJ, Recurso Especial No. 1,602,076/SP, 15 September 2016, Reporting Justice Nancy Andrighi.
194
STJ, Recurso Especial No. 1,602,076/SP, 15 September 2016, Reporting Justice Nancy Andrighi, p. 19. See also STJ,
Recurso Especial No. 1,550,260/RS, 12 December 2017, Reporting Justice Paulo Tarso Sanseverino (the competence-
competence principle shall prevail in cases of alleged forgery of signatures in arbitration agreements).
195
Cass. Civ. 1, 21 May 1997, Case Nos 95-11429, 95-11427 and Cass. Civ. 1, 30 March 2004, Case No. 02-12259.
196
Cass. Civ. 1, 30 September 2020, Case No. 18-19241.
197
See, e.g., the Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, ss. 178(3) and 186; Brazilian Arbitration Act 1996, s. 8; English Arbitration Act 1996,
ss. 7 and 30.
198
[2004] EWHC 2909 (QB), [2004] Arb LR 729.
199
Ibid., at [20]. For commentary on this decision, see Dundas, ‘Separability and jurisdiction: Court assistance to
arbitration and a costs horror story—Three recent cases in the English courts’ (2005) 71 Arbitration 3.
200
See e.g., STJ, Conflito de Competência No. 139,519/RJ, 11 October 2017, Reporting Justice Napoleão Nunes Maia
Filho. Brazil’s Superior Court of Justice held that the competence-competence principle applies in disputes involving
state entities. In that case, the Court stated ‘[t] he arbitral jurisdiction precedes state court’s jurisdiction, which means the
arbitrators have the power to decide on the limits of their jurisdiction before anyone else (the competence-competence
principle), as well as on any issues concerning the existence, validity and effectiveness of the arbitration agreement’. The
Court, therefore, declared that the ICC tribunal—and not Brazilian federal courts—had competence over the dispute.
201
Model Law, Art. 34(2)(a)(i).
202
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(a).
203
[2010] UKSC 46, [2011] 1 All ER 485.

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
204
Gouvernement du Pakistan, Ministere des Affaires Religieuses v Société Dallah Real Estate & Tourism Holding
Company, Paris cour d’appel, 17 February 2011, Case No. 09-28533.
205
For commentary on this decision, see, e.g., Grierson and Taok, ‘Dallah: Conflicting judgments from the UK Supreme
Court and the Paris Cour d’Appel’ (2011) 28 J Intl Arb 407.
206
For example, in England, under the Arbitration Act 1996, ss 32 and 67 and in France under the French Code of Civil
Procedure, arts 1519 and 1520(1).
207
For example, English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 32. This particular option for challenging jurisdiction is narrowly drawn
and may be pursued only with the permission of the other party (or parties) or the tribunal. It was intended for cases in
which a challenge to the courts on jurisdiction would almost inevitably follow an arbitral award on this matter.
208
ICSID Convention, Art. 48(3).
209
The ICSID Secretariat will refuse attempts to register applications for annulment of positive jurisdictional decisions.
Indeed, where the jurisdictional decision is positive, they are called ‘decisions on jurisdiction’, and where they are
negative and the case is effectively dismissed, they are called ‘awards on jurisdiction’. Only awards are subject to a
possible annulment process.
210
Model Law, Art. 16(3). The jurisdictional award must be challenged within thirty days of its notification to the competent
courts of the seat.
211
Eco Oro Minerals Corp v Republic of Colombia, ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41, Procedural Order 2, 28 June 2018, at [50].
212
Proposed Amendments of the ICSID Rules—Arbitration Rule 42.4 (November 2021).
213
See, e.g., Philip Morris Asia Limited v Commonwealth of Australia, PCA Case No. 2012-12, Procedural Order No. 8,
14 April 2014, at [13]; ICSID ‘Proposals for Amendment of the ICSID Rules’, Working Paper #1, 2 August 2018, para
393 (citing, e.g., Tulip Real Estate and Development Netherlands BV v Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/28,
Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation under Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention, 2 November 2012,
at [30]).
214
Model Law, Art. 16(3). See Chapter 9.
215
See Chapter 11.
216
Certain laws require pleas as to the lack of jurisdiction of the tribunal to be raised before the submission of the defence
on the merits: see, e.g., Model Law, Art. 16(2). See also the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 31(1), which requires this
plea to be mades not later than ‘the time [when the objecting party] takes the first step in the proceedings to contest the
merits of any matter in relation to which he challenges the tribunal’s jurisdiction’.
217
For example, UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 23.2; LCIA Rules, Art. 23.3.
218
For the purposes of this section, the ‘first step’ does not include any participation in the appointment of an arbitrator.
See also the Swiss PIL, s. 186(2).
219
Venezuelan Law on Commercial Arbitration 1998, s. 25.
220
See Chapter 6, paragraph 6.206.
221
See ICSID Case No. ARB/83/2, Award, 31 March 1986, at [378].
222
In Letco v Liberia, the tribunal awarded full costs against Liberia on the basis of ‘Liberia’s procedural bad faith’: ibid.,
at [378].
223
Article II requires courts of signatory states to decline jurisdiction and refer the parties to arbitration where an arbitration
agreement exists. The relevant national court must simply decide whether the arbitration agreement is null and void,
inoperative, or incapable of being performed. If it is not, the parties will be referred to arbitration.
224
For example, it would be possible in such countries as England and Switzerland, where the policy is that issues of
jurisdiction should be finally resolved at the earliest possible stage by means of concurrent court control. Such control
is not possible in the United States.
225
This would be the position under Model Law, Art. 4. If a party has appeared and participated in the arbitration without
raising any objections to the jurisdiction of the tribunal, it may be deemed to have impliedly submitted to the arbitration
and any challenge to jurisdiction thereafter might be viewed as a mere device. It is significant, though, that Art. 4 refers
to provisions from which the parties ‘may derogate’, and thus a party is not capable of waiving a mandatory provision
of the applicable law.
226
See New York Convention, Art. V(1)(a) and (c).
227
Howsam v Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc., 537 US 79, 84 (2002).
228
BG Group plc v Republic of Argentina, 572 US 25, 134 S.Ct. 1198 (2014).
229
The obligation did not require any decision to be made, nor did it prevent any party from subsequently submitting the
dispute to arbitration after eighteen months or a decision with which it was not satisfied.
230
Regulation (EU) No. 1215/2012 of 12 December 2012 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments
in civil and commercial matters.

Section D. - Jurisdiction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638635 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
231
Marc Rich Co. AG v Societa Italiana Impianti PA (The Atlantic Emperor) [1989] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 548 (CA); appealed to
the ECJ and heard on 17 October 1990, [1992] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 342 (ECJ). See also the discussion in Hascher, ‘Arbitration
under the Brussels Convention’ (1997) 13 Arb Intl 33.
232
Case C-391/95 Van Uden Maritime BV v Kommanditgesellschaft in Firma Deco Line and anor [1998] 2 WLR 1181.
233
Ibid., at [33] (emphasis added).
234
West Tankers Inc. v Allianz SpA and anor [2005] EWHC 454 (Comm).
235
West Tankers Inc. v Allianz SpA and anor [2007] UKHL 4.
236
Case C-185/07 Allianz SpA and anor v West Tankers Inc . [2009] ECR I–663.
237
See, e.g., Merkin, ‘Anti-suit injunctions: The future of anti-suit injunctions in Europe’ (2009) 9 Arb LM 1; Clifford and
Browne, ‘Lost at sea or a storm in a teacup? Anti-suit injunctions after Allianz SPA (formerly Riunione Adriatica di
Sucurta SPA) v West Tankers Inc’ (2009) 12 Intl Arb L Rev 19; Noussia, ‘Antisuit injunctions and arbitration proceedings:
What does the future hold?’ (2009) 26 J Intl Arb 311.
238
See Byford and Sarwar, ‘Arbitration clauses after West Tankers: The unanswerable conundrum? Practical solutions
for enforcing arbitration clauses’ (2009) 12 Intl Arb L Rev 29; Merkin, ‘Anti-suit injunctions: The future of anti-suit
injunctions in Europe’ (2009) 9 Arb LM 1; Michaelson and Blanke, ‘Anti-suit injunctions and the recoverability of legal
costs as damages for breach of an arbitration agreement’ (2008) 74 Arbitration 12; Veeder, ‘The Brussels Regulation,
the Lugano Convention, the Arbitration Exception and the New Schlosser Report’, Paper presented at the ICC UK
Annual Arbitration Conference, London, 6 November 2008.
239
Regulation (EU) No. 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 on jurisdiction and
the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (recast), OJ L 351/1, 20 December 2012.
240
Articles 75 and 76 of Regulation 1215/2012 came into force on 10 January 2014.
241
Article 73(2) of Regulation 1215/2012 also provides that ‘[t] his Regulation shall not affect the application of the 1958
New York Convention’.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
