Section E. - Form and Content of Awards, UKBC-REDFERN 530638658 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section E. - Form and Content of Awards
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 9 - Award
Section E. - Form and Content of Awards
(a) Generally
9. 141
The best awards are short, reasoned, and simply written in clear, unambiguous language. An arbitral tribunal should aim at
rendering a correct, valid, and enforceable award. Under some systems of law, it may have to do so as a matter of legal
obligation; 196  or it may be required to do so under the applicable institutional rules. Whether or not there is a legal obligation,
the arbitral tribunal will want to do its best, as a matter of professional pride, to ensure that the award is enforceable: having
been entrusted with the duty of determining a dispute for the parties, it will naturally wish to ensure that its duty is properly
and effectively discharged.
9. 142
A distinguished arbitrator has suggested that:
A valid yardstick for assessing the diligence shown by the arbitrators in drawing up an arbitral award that is
enforceable and likely to be recognised, is to apply the criteria established under the New York Convention, since
compliance therewith will enable recognition and enforcement of the arbitral award in all the signatory countries.
Consequently, no arbitral tribunal could be held responsible in a case where its decision was not recognised in a
given country for failing to fulfil some mandatory requirement imposed by that country’s domestic law, unless the
parties had expressly advised the tribunal of this circumstance, which should rightly have been taken into account
when the arbitral award was drawn up. 197
9. 143
The award of an international arbitral tribunal may be challenged in the courts of the seat of arbitration; 198  and recognition
and enforcement of the award may be refused by a competent court in the place(s) in which such recognition or enforcement
is sought. This subject is discussed in detail later. 199  The point to be made here is that an arbitral tribunal should bear the
possibilities of challenge and post-award recourse in mind when drawing up its award. Against this background, the validity of
an award must be considered under two headings: form and content.
(b) Form of the award
9. 144
In general, the requirements of form are dictated by the arbitration agreement (including the rules of any arbitral institution
chosen by the parties) and the law governing the arbitration (the lex arbitri).
(i) Arbitration agreement
9. 145

Section E. - Form and Content of Awards, UKBC-REDFERN 530638658 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
It is necessary to check whether the arbitration agreement specifies any particular formalities for the award. In practice, this
means examining any set of rules that the parties have adopted. The UNCITRAL Rules, for example, lay down the following
requirements:
 
•the award shall be made in writing;
 
•the reasons upon which the award is based shall be stated (unless otherwise agreed);
 
•the award shall be signed by the arbitrators, and shall contain the date on which and the place where it was made; and
 
•where there are three arbitrators and one of them fails to sign, the award shall state the reason for the absence of the
signature. 200
9. 146
The only arbitral institution that sets out the detailed obligations for an arbitrator when writing an award is ICSID. Rule 47
of the ICSID Rules states:
 
(1) The award shall be in writing and shall contain:
 
(a) a precise designation of each party;
 
(b) a statement that the Tribunal was established under the Convention, and a description
of the method of its constitution;
 
(c) the name of each member of the Tribunal, and an identification of the appointing
authority of each;
 
(d) the names of the agents, counsel and advocates of the parties;
 
(e) the dates and place of the sittings of the Tribunal;
 
(f) a summary of the proceeding;
 
(g) a statement of the facts as found by the Tribunal;
 
(h) the submissions of the parties;
 
(i) the decision of the Tribunal on every question submitted to it, together with the reasons
upon which the decision is based; and
 
(j) any decision of the Tribunal regarding the cost of the proceeding.
 
(2) The award shall be signed by the members of the Tribunal who voted for it; the date of each
signature shall be indicated.
 
(3) Any member of the Tribunal may attach his individual opinion to the award, whether he
dissents from the majority or not, or a statement of his dissent. (Emphasis added)
9. 147
These two examples, drawn from institutional rules of arbitration, indicate the importance for the arbitral tribunal of checking
the form (and contents) of its award against the relevant rules.
(ii) Law governing the arbitration
9. 148
The requirements of form imposed by national systems of law vary from the comprehensive to the virtually non-existent.
The Swiss Code of Civil Procedure, under Part III, which govern domestic arbitrations in Switzerland, lays down detailed

Section E. - Form and Content of Awards, UKBC-REDFERN 530638658 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
requirements, 201  but for international cases, these are narrowed to just four—namely, that the award be in writing, reasoned,
dated, and signed. 202  Section 52 of the English Arbitration Act 1996 follows the same lines:
Section 52
(1) The parties are free to agree on the form of an award.
(2) If or to the extent that there is no such agreement, the following provisions apply.
(3) The award shall be in writing signed by all the arbitrators or all those assenting to the award.
(4) The award shall contain the reasons for the award unless it is an agreed award or the parties have
agreed to dispense with reasons.
(5) The award shall state the seat of the arbitration and the date when the award is made.
(iii) Introductory section of an award
9. 149
Awards will usually begin by setting out the names and addresses of the parties, and the names and contact details of their
representatives and of the tribunal, and any tribunal secretary. The award will then usually contain a brief, preliminary
narrative setting out the background to the dispute between the parties. This preliminary narrative should include an
identification of the arbitration agreement or document containing the arbitration clause, which it is usual to set out in detail,
since it is the foundation on which the arbitration is built. It will then usually be followed by a brief outline of the dispute
or disputes that have arisen between the parties, the relief claimed (including interest and costs, if claimed, as they normally
would be), the dates on which the arbitrator or arbitrators were appointed, and by whom this was done.
9. 150
This will then generally be followed by the procedural history of the arbitral proceedings, which ideally will serve to show
that the parties were treated equally and had a reasonable opportunity to present their cases to the tribunal. There will then
usually follow a discussion of the merits of the issues in dispute, where the tribunal will do its best to summarise the evidence
and arguments of the parties as briefly but as accurately as possible. This summary will generally be followed by the tribunal’s
detailed analysis of the parties’ evidence and argument, and a ‘discussion’ of its conclusions and of its reasons for reaching
those conclusions. Finally, the tribunal will then record its decisions on the issues before it, including any claims for interest
and costs, in the final, dispositive section of its award.
9. 151
We started this discussion of the form and content of an award by stating that the best awards are short, reasoned, and simply
written, in clear and unambiguous language. This remains true. It must be admitted, however, that in all but the very simplest
of cases, it is difficult now to produce an award that is short. In part, this is due to the increasing number of challenges to
awards, so that tribunals feel obliged to enter into more detail than they would have done in the past about the procedure that
has been followed, the arguments that have been raised, and the way in which those arguments have been dealt with. In part
too, it is due to the requirements of the arbitral institutions. They are naturally concerned about the quality of awards issued
under their rules, by arbitrators coming from all kinds of professional and cultural backgrounds, and they want to ensure that
essential points are not overlooked.
9. 152
The ICC, for example, issues arbitrators with an ‘ICC Award Checklist’ which provides guidance on the drafting of an ICC
award. This checklist itself is a detailed document, with guidance on such matters as page and paragraph numbering and, more
importantly, with seven major headings. These include identifying the parties and their representatives, with their correct
names and addresses; quotation of the entire arbitration agreement and any relevant choice of law clause; a history of the
arbitral proceedings, including details of the appointment of the tribunal, again with correct names and addresses; a note

Section E. - Form and Content of Awards, UKBC-REDFERN 530638658 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
on the jurisdiction of the tribunal, if it was at issue; costs; and a dispositive section, dealing with all the parties’ issues and
claims, including the most recent claims for relief, and noting the place of arbitration, the date on which the award is made,
and the signatures of the members of the tribunal. In a world in which awards are increasingly subject to challenge, it is
right for a tribunal to check carefully that it has done all that is required in drafting its award, in terms both of form and of
substance. But it is difficult to do this briefly.
(iv) Signatures
9. 153
Some national systems of law require all arbitrators to sign the award in order for it to be valid. Formalities with regards to
signature still exist in the United Arab Emirates (UAE), for example, and are important to follow. A decision by the Dubai
Court of Cassation in 2009 203  distinguished between awards in which the grounds were included in the same document as
the award itself and awards in which the grounds and the award were in separate documents. It was held that arbitrators could
sign the final page on which the award appears, if it is attached to the grounds; if they are in separate documents, then the
Court held that the page with the grounds must be signed, as well as each page of the award by all of the arbitrators. 204  In
practice, arbitrators sitting in arbitration proceedings in the UAE normally sign every page of the award.
9. 154
The major institutional rules all deal expressly or impliedly with signature of the award. The ICC Rules, as already noted,
make it clear that the award must be signed, but the award of a majority of the arbitrators or, if there is no majority, the award
of the presiding arbitrator alone is effective. 205  As noted above, a similar provision is found in the LCIA Rules. 206
(v) Language of the award
9. 155
The award will normally be rendered in the language of the arbitration. Nevertheless, it is a condition of recognition and
enforcement under the New York Convention that a foreign arbitral award must be accompanied by an officially certified
translation into the language of the place in which recognition or enforcement of the award is sought, when this is not the
language of the award. 207
(c) Contents of the award
9. 156
The contents of an award, like its form, are dictated primarily by the arbitration agreement and the law governing the arbitration
(the lex arbitri).
(i) Arbitration agreement
9. 157
Arbitration agreements usually provide that the award is to be final and binding upon the parties. It follows that the award
should deal with all matters referred to arbitration, insofar as they have not been dealt with by any interim or partial awards.
However, arbitration agreements rarely go on to describe the content of the award; the nearest they get is to incorporate a
set of arbitration rules. Such rules invariably also provide that the award should deal with such matters as the costs of the
arbitration 208  and the payment of interest. The rules may also provide that the award shall state the reasons upon which it is
based. 209  Even if not specifically required, the giving of reasons is a practice that should be followed unless there is some
very good reason why it should not be (for example, because the parties have agreed to dispense with reasons). 210

Section E. - Form and Content of Awards, UKBC-REDFERN 530638658 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
(ii) Unambiguous
9. 158
Most national systems of law require an award to be unambiguous and dispositive. Ambiguity is often capable of being cured,
either by the arbitral tribunal interpreting the award at the request of the parties (or occasionally at the request of only one
of them), 211  or by an application to the relevant national court for an order that the award should be remitted to the arbitral
tribunal for clarification. 212  The position is similar where the award contains provisions that are inconsistent.
(iii) Determination of the issues
9. 159
An award must also be dispositive, in that it must constitute an effective determination of the issues in dispute. It is not
sufficient for the arbitral tribunal to issue a vague expression of opinion. The award must be formulated in an imperative
tone: ‘we award’, ‘we direct’, ‘we order’, or the equivalent.
9. 160
Equally, if there is more than one respondent and a monetary award is made in favour of the claimant, it is essential for the
arbitral tribunal to make it clear whether one of the respondents, and if so, which one, has the obligation to make the payment,
or whether the obligation is joint and several.
9. 161
An award should not direct the parties to perform an illegal act or require the parties to do anything that may be considered
contrary to public policy, 213  nor should the award contain any directions that are outside the scope of authority of the arbitral
tribunal.
(iv) Reasons
9. 162
The way in which reasons are given in arbitral awards varies considerably. Sometimes, the reasoning, or ‘motivation’, is set
out with extreme brevity. However, a mere statement that the arbitral tribunal accepted the evidence of one party and rejected
the evidence of the other, which was common practice for some arbitrators, has fallen into disrepute.
9. 163
Even today, there are arbitrations in which providing reasons is likely to seem unnecessary. An arbitrator in a quality
arbitration, for example, who is asked to decide whether goods supplied do or do not correspond to sample, can hardly do
much more than answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’. That said, for the vast majority of international arbitrations, a reasoned award is not
only appropriate, but will probably be obligatory under the applicable arbitration rules or the lex arbitri.
9. 164
The ICSID Convention, as already stated, calls for a reasoned award, without any exceptions; 214  and in practice, the ICC
Court considers awards that are insufficiently reasoned to be defective as to form. They are therefore sent back to the arbitral
tribunal for amendment, before they can be approved. The UNCITRAL Rules take the same approach as the Model Law:
reasons should be given, unless the parties agree otherwise. 215  The requirement that an award be reasoned is also commonly
found in national laws governing arbitrations. 216
9. 165

Section E. - Form and Content of Awards, UKBC-REDFERN 530638658 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
The New Zealand Court of Appeal, in setting aside an award in which the reasoning comprised only five paragraphs, explained
that reasons ‘must be coherent and comply with an elementary level of logic of adequate substance to enable the parties to
understand how and why [the tribunal reached its decision]’. It went on to hold that the extent of the reasons to be given will
be dictated by context and ‘must reflect the importance of the arbitral reference and the panel’s conclusion’. 217  In contrast,
the English Commercial Court recently held that a failure to provide adequate reasons cannot amount to a serious irregularity
under section 68(2)(c) or 68(2)(h) of the English Arbitration Act. 218
(d) Time limits
9. 166
A limit may be imposed as to the time within which the arbitral tribunal must make its award. When this limit is reached, the
authority or mandate of the arbitral tribunal is at an end and it no longer has jurisdiction to make a valid award. This means
that, where a time limit exists, care must be taken to see that either the time limit is observed, or that the time limit is extended
before it expires. The purpose of time limits is to ensure that the case is dealt with speedily. Such limits may be imposed on the
arbitral tribunal by the rules of an arbitral institution, by the lex arbitri, or by agreement of the parties.
9. 167
The laws of a number of countries provide for the time limits within which an award must be made, sometimes starting from
the date upon which the arbitration itself commenced. In India, 2015 amendments to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act
1996 imposed an obligation on arbitral tribunals to render an award within twelve months from the date of the tribunal’s
constitution (which time limit could be extended by a further six months only). 219  This reform was subject to widespread
criticism, particularly given its one-size-fits-all approach. Accordingly, the Indian Act was further amended in 2019 to clarify
that international commercial arbitrations seated in India are not subject to strict application of the twelve-month time limit. 220
In the United States, the position varies from state to state. In some states, the limit is thirty days from the date on which the
hearings are closed. However, time limits in the United States may also be extended by mutual agreement of the parties or
by court order.
9. 168
In the institutional context, the ICC ‘expects arbitral tribunals to render awards within six months from the establishment of
the Terms of Reference, or within the time limit fixed by the Court’. 221  In the authors’ experience, however, this time limit
is routinely extended by the Court. The ICC does, however, employ a ‘stick and carrot’ approach to incentivise efficiency.
For example, if a tribunal exceeds the agreed time limit for rendering an award, the ICC may lower the tribunal’s fees. 222
Conversely, if the tribunal conducts the arbitration expeditiously, the ICC may increase its fees. 223
9. 169
It is important that a fixed time limit for rendering the award should not enable one of the parties to frustrate the arbitration. This
might happen if a fixed limit were to run from the date of the appointment of the arbitral tribunal, rather than, for example, that
of the end of the hearings. If a court has no power to intervene on the application of one party alone and the time limit can be
extended only by agreement of the parties, a party might frustrate the proceedings simply by refusing to agree to any extension
of time. However, the courts of many countries would be reluctant to invalidate a late award in such a case. For example, in
New York, it was held that an untimely award was not a nullity, even though the issue of timeliness was properly raised: the
court stated that, without a finding of prejudice, there was no justification for denying confirmation of the award. 224
(i) Disadvantages of mandatory time limits
9. 170
It is rare to find time limits for delivery of the award in non-institutional rules. Where such limits are imposed, it may be by
the national law although it is usually by an express agreement between the parties, contained in the arbitration clause or the
submission agreement. Undoubtedly, such a provision is inserted with the intention of putting pressure on the arbitral tribunal

Section E. - Form and Content of Awards, UKBC-REDFERN 530638658 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
to complete its work with due despatch and in order to minimise the opportunities for delaying the resolution of disputes by
the parties themselves. However, it is a strategy that may well prove to be counterproductive. In most substantial international
cases before an arbitral tribunal consisting of three arbitrators, it is usually impracticable to complete the arbitration within
such a short period of time as six months. The result is that the arbitral tribunal may be forced into a situation in which, in
order to comply with the time limit, it must issue its award without giving the respondent a proper opportunity to present
its case. Such an award is vulnerable to an action for nullity or to a successful defence to enforcement proceedings. Thus
the successful party finds that, far from the time limit having assisted in a speedy resolution of the dispute, it contributes to
overall delay and ineffectiveness in the arbitral process. 225  In addition, a number of arbitral institutions have now introduced
expedited procedures for the conduct of an international arbitration, and a standard feature of these procedures is a provision
for the award to be made within a relatively short time. 226
9. 171
In general, it is preferable that no time limit should be prescribed for the making of the award in an arbitration clause or
submission agreement. However, if the parties consider it desirable to set a limit, or if it is necessary to do so under the
applicable law, the time limit should, if possible, be related to the closure of the hearings and not to the appointment of the
arbitral tribunal, or to some other stage in the arbitration at which the respondent will have opportunities to create delay. A
provision that the award must be issued within a certain time after the closure of the hearings helps to ensure that the arbitral
tribunal proceeds diligently with its task. It is frustrating for the parties if the arbitral tribunal takes many months to deliberate
and to issue its award. However, any time limit should be realistic and not merely one that incites the arbitral tribunal to make
the award in too great a hurry, thus potentially exposing the award to a successful challenge.
(ii) Non-mandatory provisions
9. 172
Perhaps the best way in which the parties can put time pressure on an arbitral tribunal, without placing the effectiveness
of the proceedings at risk, is to insert some form of non-mandatory provision. In one ICC case, 227  the arbitration clause
contained a provision to the effect that ‘the parties wish that the award shall be issued within five months of the date of the
appointment of the third arbitrator’.
9. 173
The arbitral tribunal considered it necessary to clarify the position and, at its request, the parties confirmed that this provision:
 
•superseded the provision of Article 18.1 of the then applicable 1998 ICC Rules, which provided that the award was to
be made within six months of the signing of the terms of reference; and
 
•did not affect the power of the ICC Court to extend the time limit provided for by the parties, in accordance with Article
18.2 of the then applicable 1998 ICC Rules.
9. 174
In effect, therefore, the parties set a target for the arbitral tribunal in their arbitration agreement, without imposing any
mandatory provision that might have placed at risk the effectiveness of that agreement.
(e) Notification of awards
9. 175
International and institutional rules of arbitration generally make provision for the notification of the award to the parties. The
UNCITRAL Rules provide, at Article 34.6, that ‘[c]opies of the award signed by the arbitrators shall be communicated to the
parties by the arbitral tribunal’. However, no time limit is imposed within which this must be done. The position is similar
under the ICSID Rules, Rule 48.1 of which merely states that a certified copy of the award (including individual opinions and
statements of dissent) will be sent to the parties ‘promptly’ when the last arbitrator has signed it. Article 35.1 of the ICC Rules
provides that the Secretariat will notify the parties once an award has been made, provided that the costs have been fully paid. 228

Section E. - Form and Content of Awards, UKBC-REDFERN 530638658 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
9. 176
That party which expects to have won the case will invariably make it its business to obtain a copy of the award as soon
as practicable, either directly from the arbitral tribunal or from the relevant arbitral institution. If that party has won, it will
immediately communicate the award to the unsuccessful party. The time limit within which a party may apply to the appropriate
court for recourse against the award may run from the date of communication of the award and not from the making of the
award itself. However, the position should be checked under the law of the place in which recourse may be sought, which is
normally the place of arbitration.
(f) Registration or deposit of awards
9. 177
In some countries, registration for the purposes of recognition by the courts is unnecessary or optional. In others, it may be a
necessary prelude to enforcement of a foreign award. In such cases, there may be an element of ‘double exequatur’, which has
been strongly criticised by the draftsmen of the New York Convention, amongst others. 229  The principle on which the New
York Convention is based is that the award needs only to be binding on the parties in order for it to be enforceable. Nonetheless,
registration is a matter that may affect the validity of the award if the mandatory provisions of the place in which the arbitration
is held require it. 230  Where the requirement is mandatory, it must be deposited in order to protect the validity of the award.
9. 178
Even when it is not mandatory, registration or deposit of an award may be desirable in order to put pressure on the unsuccessful
party. In some cases, registration of the award is relevant for the purposes of the time limit within which any application
for annulment of the award must be made. Although registration will not necessarily assist the successful party in relation
to enforcement actions in other countries, it may protect the award from any further challenge in the country in which the
arbitration took place.
Footnotes
196
See Chapter 5.
197
Cremades, ‘The arbitral award’, in Newman and Hill (eds) The Leading Arbitrators’ Guide to International Arbitration
(2nd edn, Juris, 2008), p. 500.
198
Or, exceptionally, if the parties have agreed to subject the arbitration to the law of a ‘foreign’ country, in the courts
of that country.
199
See Chapter 11, paragraphs 11.54 to 11.105.
200
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 34. See also Swiss Rules, Art. 32.
201
Swiss Code of Civil Procedure, Pt. III, Art. 384.
202
Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, s. 189(2).
203
Dubai Court of Cassation, Petition No. 156/2009 (considering the signature requirement under Art. 212(5) of the former
UAE Arbitration Chapter).
204
In a recent ruling (14 June 2020), the Dubai Court of Cassation confirmed that the position remains the same under
UAE’s new federal arbitration law, which entered into force in June 2018 (see Ali & Sons Marine Engineering Factory
LLC v E-Marine FZC, Civil Cassation Appeal No. 1083/2019). In this case, rather than accede to the applicant’s request
to annul the award on the ground that the arbitrators had not signed the pages of the award containing the grounds or
the operative part of the award, the Court of Cassation instead directed the matter to be remitted to the tribunal so that
this clerical error could be rectified.
205
ICC Rules, Art. 32.1.
206
LCIA Rules, Art. 26.5.
207
New York Convention, Art. IV(2).

Section E. - Form and Content of Awards, UKBC-REDFERN 530638658 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
208
See, e.g., UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 40; ICC Rules, Art. 38; LCIA Rules, Art. 28.
209
See, e.g., UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 34.3; ICSID Rules, r. 47.1.i.
210
For further discussion on this topic, see paragraphs 9.162–9.165.
211
See paragraphs 9.193 and 9.196-9.200.
212
See, e.g., English Arbitration Act, s. 57(3) (permitting a party to apply for correction of an award to ‘clarify or remove
any ambiguity’).
213
However, since public policy considerations vary from country to country, it may be difficult to avoid this in all cases,
e.g. an award of interest may be acceptable in the country in which the award is made, but not in the country of eventual
enforcement (which will often be difficult for the tribunal to predict at the time of issuing its award).
214
ICSID Convention, Art. 48(3).
215
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 34.3. See also LCIA Rules, Art. 26.2.
216
See, e.g., English Arbitration Act, s. 52(4) and New Zealand Arbitration Act 1996, s. 31(2).
217
Ngāti Hurungaterangi & Ors v Ngāti Wahiao [2017] NZCA 429, New Zealand Court of Appeal.
218
Islamic Republic of Pakistan v Broadsheet LLC [2019] EWHC 1832 (Comm).
219
If the arbitral tribunal failed to issue an award within the maximum available period of 18 months, its mandate was to
stand terminated unless the court, either prior to or after expiry of the specified period, extended the period on a showing
by a party of ‘sufficient cause’ (Indian Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act 2015, s. 15).
220
Indian Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act 2019, s. 6 (revising s. 29A of the Act). These reforms also
provided that the twelve-month time limit now commences from the date of completion of pleadings and not from the
Tribunal’s constitution.
221
ICC Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals, 1 January 2021, at 152.
222
Ibid., at 155.
223
Ibid., at 154.
224
State of New York Department of Taxation and Finance v Valenti 57 AD 2d 174, 393 NYS 2d 797 (1977). In contrast,
the Belgian Supreme Court annulled an award issued only eight days after the deadline fixed by the parties on the basis
that the late issuance amounted to an excess of powers (X. v Y., Court of Cassation of Belgium, Third Civil Law Chamber,
Case No. C.13.0264.N., 26 October 2015).
225
For a potential horror story, see Staatsrechtliche v ICC Schiedsgerichtsentschied, Bundesgericht, I. Zivilabteilung
(Federal Court, First Civil Division), 24 March 1997, (1997) 2 ASA Bulletin 316. For commentary, see Kreindler and
Kautz, ‘Agreed deadlines and the setting aside of arbitral awards’ (1997) 4 ASA Bulletin 576.
226
See Chapters 1 and 6.
227
ICC Case No. 5051.
228
The potential problems with delayed notification have been obviated in recent years by the increasing facilitation in
institutional rules of electronic notification of awards (with original copies to follow by courier). For example, the LCIA
Rules make clear that the transmission of an award to parties by the LCIA Court ‘may be made by any electronic
means’ (Art. 26.7). Similarly, ICC guidance notes that, ‘subject to any applicable mandatory law requirements’, any
award may be ‘notified to the parties by the Secretariat by email or any other means of telecommunication that provides
a record of the sending’ (ICC Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals, 1 January 2021, at 199).
229
See Chapter 11, paragraph 11.90.
230
This must be considered separately from any requirement for the deposit of the award with an arbitral institution.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
