Article 23(1)(c), UKBC-ICCARBN 474406913 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 23(1)(c)
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 23(1)(c)
“a summary of the parties’ respective claims and of the relief sought by each party, together with the amounts of any
quantified claims and, to the extent possible, an estimate of the monetary value of any other claims;”
23-23
The Terms of Reference should be a self-standing document that is understandable for the ICC Court and any national court.
To render it understandable, basic factual allegations must be set out. Therefore, although some Tribunals simply refer to the
claims made by the parties in their pleadings, this practice renders the Terms of Reference a much less useful document.
23-24
To the extent possible, the Tribunal usually seeks to set out undisputed facts, although the extent to which that is possible will
depend on the circumstances. In many instances, the parties will agree on little more than the fact that they signed a contract
and that the contract contains specific provisions. This in itself may be very helpful as these provisions if quoted may give the
third party an overview of the contractual situation.
23-25
The Terms of Reference also set out each of the parties’ claims. These will usually include disputed facts and allegations.
Therefore, in drafting the Terms of Reference it is important to ensure that a distinction is drawn between what is undisputed
and what is disputed. In addition, the Terms of Reference should include an express statement that, by signing the Terms of
Reference, a party is not accepting any claim whether of fact or law asserted by the other party.
23-26
The term “claim” is in some instances difficult to define and is not the same as the narrower term of “relief”. 303  Different claims
may, for example, lead to the same request for relief. The term “claim” is an essential feature of art.23(1) due to the impact of
art.23(4). That article provides that no new claims may be added after the signature of the Terms of Reference that are “outside
the limits of the Terms of Reference” unless authorised by the Tribunal. It follows from art.2(iv) that the term claims “include
any claim by any party against any other party”. The usual debate in this respect is whether a party is making a new “claim”
or whether it is simply quantifying an existing claim or seeking additional relief with respect to it. In ICC case No.7453 (under
the former 1988 ICC Rules), the sole arbitrator stated with respect to the 1988 ICC Rules:
“To say that new claims may not be made (without the consent of the other party) after the Terms of Reference
have entered into effect is not to say that new calculations of damages or new theories of quantification may not
be subsequently introduced.
The Terms of Reference, after all, enter into effect at an early stage of the proceedings, usually long before a
detailed economic analysis has been made of the consequences of breach and before experts have been consulted.
Claimants, to be sure, are well advised to ensure that their claims, as restated in the Terms of Reference,
are in general terms and refer to general theories of recovery, with amounts claimed as damages carefully
designated as ‘estimates’ or ‘provisional estimates’. Failure to do so is not ordinarily fatal. New evidence, and
new quantification, of damages does not constitute a new claim.” 304

Article 23(1)(c), UKBC-ICCARBN 474406913 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
23-27
In ICC Case No.7661 (also under the former 1988 ICC Rules), the Tribunal dealt with an alternative claim. The Request had
set out a warranty claim that the claimant subsequently sought to modify to include a claim for damages. The Tribunal stated:
 
“[2]When it modified its claim, Claimant stated its principal claim as one for defendants to pay the amount
of the Tax Debt (or a reasonable and proper lesser amount) on the basis of their contractual liability, and for
defendants to pay damages ‘[a]s a further and/or alternative award’. The defendants protested against the
introduction of the damages claim on the basis of this being excluded by the Terms of Reference.
 
[3]It would go too far to fully exclude the modification of claimant’s claim on the basis of perceived
limitations imposed by the Terms of Reference and of the operation of art.16 of the [1988] ICC Rules.
Claimant’s initial formulation of its claim was ambiguous at best and this was reflected in the Terms of
Reference, nothing in which can therefore be construed as prohibiting a correction such as applied by the
Claimant through stating a principal warranty claim and an alternative damages claim.
 
[4]However, the modification of the claim is not admissible to the extent that damages are claimed as a
‘further award’ as this is tantamount to introducing a new claim, outside the limits of the Terms of Reference,
which are flexible enough to permit, in the circumstances, a choice of the basis of the claim, but not flexible
enough to allow for amounts higher than the amount which Claimant clearly had stated as a maximum …
Thus, any claim for damages in addition to the warranty claim, instead of alternative to it, is outside the
Terms of Reference and, in view of art.16 of the ICC Rules, inadmissible.”
23-28
Most ICC arbitrations that concern commercial disputes (as opposed to investor-state disputes) revolve around allegations of
breach of contract and one view is that each allegation of breach of contract is a separate claim. Therefore, if a party claims
that the other has breached three provisions of a contract, but then wishes to amend that argument to allege a breach of a fourth
provision of a contract or make a claim in tort, then the claim may amount to a new claim. Whether this claim would fall outside
the limits of the Terms of Reference is discussed under art.23(4).
23-29
In arbitration law, claims are sometimes referred to as petita. Hence claims that a Tribunal has acted beyond its authority are
claims that the Tribunal has acted ultra petita. Claims that the Tribunal has failed to adjudicate an issue that it was required to
adjudicate are claims that the Tribunal has acted infra petita.
23-30
Usually, each party’s claim will involve a mixture of fact and law. The factual allegations are necessary to understand the
legal position. A Tribunal may want to draft the summary of the claims itself and reproduce the relief sought from the parties’
submissions, or have each of the parties draft their own outline of their claims and insert this draft in the Terms of Reference.
The latter method has the advantage of showing each of the parties that their approach to the dispute is exactly reflected in
the Terms of Reference. The approach has, however, been criticised in that it does not ensure that the Tribunal has actually
understood the parties’ positions, as the Tribunal is simply incorporating the parties’ respective drafts in the Terms of Reference.
In each case, it is for the Tribunal to appreciate what is the better or more appropriate approach.
23-31
The summary of the claim can be quite brief, as there is no need for it, and it would not contain all the allegations of material
fact that one would find even in a basic national pleading. Nor would it refer to or cite detailed documents. The overall approach
is to permit the reader to understand on what basis the claim is being made. The details of the allegations and the documents
relied upon will be filed with the subsequent submissions.
23-32

Article 23(1)(c), UKBC-ICCARBN 474406913 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
The Terms of Reference should also state clearly whether the claims are in contract or tort (delict) as the nature of the claims
may be important to determine the rules of law applicable to them.
23-33
The Terms of Reference should also set out exactly the relief sought by each of the parties. This relief is usually taken from
the parties’ written submissions. Article 23(1)(c) requires that the parties insert the amount of quantified claims and to the
extent possible an estimate of the monetary value of other claims. This provision was introduced in the Rules to seek an earlier
quantification of claims as is discussed under art.4(3) and art.5(1) and (5).
23-34
Subsequent adjustments to the relief sought are also taken into account. Usually, the relief requested will consist of a request
for payment of a certain sum of monies, e.g. by way of damages, a request for a declaration or a request for an injunction.
23-35
Generally, in an ICC arbitration, parties are not expected at this stage to provide a detailed calculation of the damages that they
are claiming, as the exact quantification of a damage claim will be made after an expert has reviewed the matter. This is true
in particular, but not solely in construction cases, where it can take a party’s experts many months to assess the amount of the
loss suffered. Usually, the parties provide a minimum amount claimed. This would enable the other party to ascertain roughly
the amount at risk. It would also enable the ICC Court to set an amount for the provisional advance on the costs of arbitration.
Some parties are reluctant to be precise about the amount claimed at the Terms of Reference stage due to the effect that it may
have on the advance on costs ordered by the ICC. The party may also fear losing its credibility if the subsequent amount is, for
instance, much lower than it had initially indicated as being the damages suffered. If the amount of a claim is increased at any
point in the proceedings, then the ICC will usually take the amount of the increase into account and recalculate the amount of
the advance on the costs of arbitration as is discussed under art.37. 305
23-36
The request for relief should include alternative and ancillary requests. In particular, the currency of the damages should be
set out (as well as the basis for the claim in that currency). If interest is sought, then the basis and amount claimed should
be provided as well as the date from which the party is claiming interest. Moreover, it should be clear whether the interest is
claimed by contract, under the rules of law applicable to the contract, or under the procedural rules of the place of arbitration.
23-37
Claims by way of set-off are generally viewed as claims under the ICC Rules. 306  To be entitled to set-off one claim against
another, the claim must exist and be of a fixed amount.
Footnotes
303
In the ICC Rules, the term “claim” is expressed in French as “prétention,” in German as “Vorbringen”, in Spanish as
“pretensiones” and in Italian as “pretese”, but only the French and English texts are official. This is not stated in the Rules
itself, but on the first inner cover page of ICC Publication 880-0ENG, which contains the English version of the Rules.
304
ICC Case No.7453 (1994), (1997) YBCA Vol. XXII p.107; Collection of ICC Arbitral Awards 1996–2000, Vol.IV, op.
cit., p.94.
305
See the discussion under art.37(5) at para.37-41 and following.
306
See the discussion under art.37(7) at para.37-57 and following.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
