Effect of the language of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407086 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Effect of the language of the arbitration
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Effect of the language of the arbitration
20-41
As explained above, the language of the arbitration has a limited impact on the Secretariat’s communications with the parties.
It may have an impact on the selection of counsel by the parties, and of arbitrators, as discussed in the context of art.13(1). 104
20-42
Many ICC arbitrations are conducted by multilingual Tribunals. Therefore, as noted in the introductory remarks, while English
may be the official language of the procedure, the impact of other languages, and particularly the language of the members of
the Tribunal, is important. There is no requirement that the Tribunal deliberate in the language of the arbitration and Tribunals
generally deliberate in the language with which they are most comfortable. 105  However, if one of the members of the Tribunal
is only familiar with the language of the arbitration, he or she will be able to insist that this language also be used for the
deliberations, as well as for all internal communications between the members of the Tribunal.
20-43
Many contracts which are subject to civil law as the governing law are written in English. The result in some instances is that
the language of the contract does not correspond to the terms used in the civil law system. 106  The extent to which the Tribunal
will consider the linguistic background of the parties in interpreting the contract will vary. It may well be a factor, especially
if the issue is the interpretation of a clause that has a specific meaning under common law that may not be readily appreciated
by some persons who do not speak English as their native language.
20-44
In addition, even if English is the language of the arbitration and the language of the relevant contract, that does not necessarily
mean that in an international arbitration the English terms will always be given their most technical meaning when interpreted
by Tribunals. For example, in ICC arbitration no.16682, a Tribunal had to decide upon the meaning of the words “to use best
endeavours” in a share purchase agreement governed by Austrian law, the parties (who were both from Continental Europe)
having taken conflicting views. In relevant parts, the Arbitral Tribunal analysed the situation as follows:
 
“110.[T]he question arises: to what extent must U.S. law (where ‘best efforts’ is the equivalent to ‘best
endeavours’; … or English law be taken into account when interpreting the SPA? It is true that both,
Mr. [X] and Mr. [Y], hold Anglo-American postgraduate degrees and have experience with international
M&A contracts. However, both are Austrian lawyers and their clients (the Parties to these proceedings)
had little or no connection to U.S. or English law. In the SPA, English was chosen as a lingua franca
by non-native speakers. It has been pointed out in scholarly writing precisely for such circumstances that
the interpretation of contractual terms according to English law would be contrary to the parties’ interests
(TRIEBEL/BALTHASAR, Auslegung Englischer Vertragstexte unter deutschem Vertragsstatut - Fallstricke
des art.32 I Nr. 1 EGBGB, in NJW 2004, pp 2195 et seq).
 
111.Clause 8. 7 of the SPA forms part of a standard contract template. respondents emphasize that little
attention was paid to its meaning in the negotiation of the SPA. Corporate lawyers with a civil law background
tend to copy and paste such phrases and Mr. [X]—at the Evidentiary Hearing—explicitly confirmed that he
had at least partially reproduced the clauses in the SPA from earlier transactions. He might indeed not have
thought about the exact German translation of ‘best endeavours’. In the view of the majority of the Arbitral

Effect of the language of the arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407086 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Tribunal, it would be far-fetched to assume that the two Austrian M&A lawyers involved had the subtleties
of U.S. and English case law in mind when negotiating the SPA The majority of the arbitrators are therefore
of the opinion that the relevant standard for the interpretation of the SPA must be that of a typical Austrian
M&A lawyer who has received some training in a common law jurisdiction and has a solid command of the
English language. As an objective and reasonable addressee, such an M&A lawyer might give thought to
the meaning of English terms under U.S. or English law when it comes to concepts which are unknown in
civil law jurisdictions. However, terms like ‘best endeavours’ can be assumed to have been negotiated on the
basis of a general understanding which the lawyers had developed in the course of their professional careers,
rather than in light of a detailed analysis of U.S. or English case law. This conclusion also appears to be in
line with the testimony given by Mr. [X] at the Evidentiary Hearing.”
Footnotes
104
See the discussion under art.13(1).
105
The Terms of Reference would not deal with the language of deliberations within the Tribunal and in most cases no
reference is made in the awards to the language used for deliberations by the Tribunal.
106
See, e.g. Triebel, “Pitfalls of English as Contract Language”, in: Olsen/Lorenz/Stein (eds), Translation Issues in
Language and Law (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009), p.158 ; Ulmer, op. cit., p.304; see also von Breitenstein, “La
langue de l’arbitrage—une langue arbitraire” [1995] ASA Bull. No.1, p.15.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
