Dual language arbitrations, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406944 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Dual language arbitrations
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Dual language arbitrations
20-33
Article 20 contemplates the possibility of several languages being languages of the arbitration. The parties may agree on two
languages for the arbitration or the Tribunal may decide that the arbitration (or parts of the arbitration) should be conducted in
two languages. In some cases, the issue is what the parties have agreed on. In one case, the parties agreed that the arbitration
be conducted in “Czech and English” and the issue was whether both languages should be used, and how. The common sense
approach in such cases is that the parties should be able to make submissions and arguments in either language (and in this case
in Czech or English), and not to require the simultaneous use of both languages. This is true in particular when the language
is not an international language.
20-34
Apart from specific circumstances such as those described at para.20-23, the use of multiple languages as languages of the
arbitration is normally not to be recommended for many reasons. First, it may be difficult to appoint an experienced arbitrator
who has a full command of all the relevant languages. Secondly, his/her linguistic skills (or lack of) may give rise to an objection
by a party to his/her confirmation as co-arbitrator by the ICC Court. In such a case, the ICC Court will usually take into account
the parties’ intent as reflected in the arbitration agreement. If the parties have laid down very specific criteria on the arbitrator’s
linguistic abilities, there is a risk that the ICC Court may decide not to confirm the potential arbitrator if he/she does not meet
those requirements. There are, however, instances where it must be sufficient that the arbitrator speaks one of the two languages,
as long as all submissions are made in both languages. On the other hand, when the arbitration agreement contains no criteria
relating to the arbitrator’s linguistic skills, the ICC Court has more discretion and it may decide to confirm an arbitrator who
does not speak one of the languages of the arbitration given that the services of an interpreter may be used. 99  It should however
be noted that the decision of the ICC Court to confirm an arbitrator does not or should not affect the power of the Tribunal to
determine the language or languages of the arbitration under art.20. 100  Thirdly, dual language arbitrations are more costly as
is discussed in the following paragraph.
20-35
In deciding the issue of the languages of arbitration, Tribunals should have regard to the overall objective of the Rules to
provide cost-effective dispute resolution. One of the advantages of international arbitration is to avoid costs of court proceedings
where each document must generally be submitted in the language of the national court system. Therefore, Tribunals frequently
adjust the procedure to reflect the linguistic abilities of the parties and their counsel. As a result, if all parties are fluent in
certain languages (such as English or Spanish), then the Tribunal may permit the parties to make submissions in the language
of their choice and submit documents in that language. Truly bilingual arbitration (where all documents and submissions are
in two languages) is cumbersome and expensive and for that reason alone should preferably be avoided. In some instances, it
is, however, unavoidable. For instance, in a recent case, the arbitration agreement provided expressly for the arbitration to be
conducted by a sole arbitrator in the language of one of the parties from an Eastern European country, which is only spoken
in that country. The foreign claimant filed the Request for Arbitration in that language, together with an English translation.
The ICC Court was unable to find a neutral sole arbitrator, with the requisite experience in a multi-million FIDIC contract
construction dispute, fluent in that language. It therefore appointed a sole arbitrator fluent in English, who would then, however,
send all communications to the parties in a bi-lingual format. The need to translate everything in the language of the arbitration
and to use an interpreter at the hearing undoubtedly added to the costs, but allowed the arbitration to proceed with an experienced
and neutral arbitrator in a way that satisfied the language of arbitration needs. 101
20-36

Dual language arbitrations, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406944 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
In many national courts, a party submitting documents in a language other than that of the national court must submit a sworn
translation of any foreign language document. That is often not the case in arbitration. Frequently, the approach in an ICC
arbitration is to permit documents to be submitted with an unsworn or working translation with the opposing party having the
possibility to question the translation, request a sworn translation, or simply submit its own translation. 102  If a Tribunal would
request that a sworn translation be provided, it would normally leave it to the parties to select the sworn translator, who may
not reside at the place of arbitration. In exceptional cases, the Tribunal may take it upon itself to appoint a sworn translator
and have a specific document translated by him/her. The costs thereof would be paid by the Tribunal out of the parties’ deposit
made at the ICC Court.
20-37
With regard to legal authorities, parties will usually seek to limit the costs of translation of texts by translating brief extracts
only (the original text being submitted as well). In ICC arbitrations in particular, many arbitrators allow the submission of legal
authorities in the language in which they were originally published. Therefore, it is always advisable to provide a copy of the
text in the original. In many cases, the parties agree that translations are not required where counsel and the parties are fluent
in the language in which the legal authorities have been published.
20-38
With regard to the award, the strong preference of most Tribunals will be to have an award in one language. This would avoid the
argument of inconsistencies between two versions of the award. Where the award is made in two languages, it is helpful to use
a side-by-side format, with each paragraph starting in each language on the same page. If the award needs to be translated into
a second language for enforcement purposes, the party seeking to enforce the award may have to provide a sworn translation
of the award into the language used by that of the enforcing court. 103
Footnotes
99
Castineira & Petsche, “The Language of the Arbitration: Reflections on the Selection of Arbitrators and Procedural
Efficiency” [2006] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.1 No.1, p.33 highlighting the difficulties for the parties when using more than
one language to find, for example, individuals who are able to satisfy the linguistic requirements without sacrificing the
legal knowledge. In addition, the difficulties can be exacerbated in the absence of a fixed practice of the ICC Court,
whose decisions are usually taken on a case-by-case basis.
100
Castineira & Petsche, “The Language of the Arbitration: Reflections on the Selection of Arbitrators and Procedural
Efficiency” [2006] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.1 No.1, p.41.
101
One of the co-authors was the sole arbitrator.
102
It is often not the translated document in its entirety, but only a few sentences or words with which the opposing party
may have trouble and take issue.
103
See art.IV(2) of the New York Convention; see also Paris, 18 March 2004, Sarl Synergie v Société SC Conect SA (2004)
Rev. Arb. No.4 p.917, note Garaud & Ziadé (absence of the translation of the award by a sworn translator is not a ground
for annulment of the exequatur decision granted by the French Court).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
