Article 25(3): Appointment by Tribunal of an expert, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407064 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 25(3): Appointment by Tribunal of an expert
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Article 4 of the IBA Rules on Evidence
Article 25(3): Appointment by Tribunal of an expert
“The arbitral tribunal, after consulting the parties, may appoint one or more experts, define their terms of reference and
receive their reports. At the request of a party, the parties shall be given the opportunity to question at a hearing any such
expert.”
25-44
In many ICC arbitrations involving technical matters and/or quantification issues, the parties designate experts as expressly
foreseen by art.25(2) and submit expert reports. As discussed below, the Tribunal may designate an expert as well, but in ICC
arbitration Tribunals seldom do so. This is the case whether the parties originate in common law or civil law jurisdictions. The
most common procedure is to have party-appointed experts. 370
25-45
Article 25(3) therefore deals with a situation, which in the practice of ICC arbitration has become the exception. Usually, the
appointment of an expert by the Tribunal will be at the request of one or both parties and if one or both parties agree to bear
the cost. 371  If the Tribunal refuses a request to appoint an expert, it should justify that decision in a Procedural Order or in the
award to avoid due process issues. 372  Rarely will a Tribunal in an ICC arbitration appoint an expert on its own initiative. 373
25-46
One of the basic issues with a Tribunal-appointed expert is the selection of the appropriate person. 374  The Tribunal has recourse
to an expert because of a lack of expertise in an area. The parties frequently have this expertise. Therefore, a Tribunal may find
it useful to request from the parties either a list of potential experts or an agreement on the name of an expert to be appointed
by the Tribunal.
25-47
The Tribunal may consult the ICC International Centre for Expertise to locate an expert. The Centre forms part of the ICC’s
International Center for ADR 375  and is part of the ICC headquarters in Paris and has an informal list of potential experts in
various areas, and enjoys contacts with experts and technical institutions all over the world that may assist it in identifying the
proper expert. 376  A flat fee of US$5,000 is charged by the Centre to appoint or propose an expert. However, Tribunals that act
under the ICC Rules are exempt from such charge for the proposal of an expert.
25-48
The costs of the expert are dealt with in art.1(12) of App.III of the Rules which provides:
“Before any expertise ordered by the arbitral tribunal can be commenced, the parties, or one of them, shall pay
an advance on costs fixed by the arbitral tribunal sufficient to cover the expected fees and expenses of the expert
as determined by the arbitral tribunal. The arbitral tribunal shall be responsible for ensuring the payment by the
parties of such fees and expenses.”

Article 25(3): Appointment by Tribunal of an expert, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407064 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
25-49
The costs of the expert are not part of the general costs of the arbitration and the advance on costs of the expert must be paid
prior to commencement of the expert’s work. 377
25-50
The Tribunal drafts the terms of reference for the expert. Whether the obligation to consult the parties applies grammatically to
the terms of reference (as well as the appointment) of the expert is not clear. 378  However, Tribunals would usually consult the
parties to ensure that the expert will deal with all technical issues that the parties reasonably deem appropriate.
25-51
Article 25(3) does not deal with how the expert conducts his or her activities. Article 6 of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides
again useful guidelines as to current practice with respect to Tribunal-appointed experts:
 
“1.The Arbitral Tribunal, after consulting with the Parties, may appoint one or more independent Tribunal-
Appointed Experts to report to it on specific issues designated by the Arbitral Tribunal. The Arbitral Tribunal
shall establish the terms of reference for any Tribunal-Appointed Expert Report after consulting with the
Parties. A copy of the final terms of reference shall be sent by the Arbitral Tribunal to the Parties.
…
 
4.The Tribunal-Appointed Expert shall report in writing to the Arbitral Tribunal in an Expert Report.
The Expert Report shall contain:
 
(a)the full name and address of the Tribunal Appointed Expert, and a description of his or her
background, qualifications, training and experience;
 
(b)a statement of the facts on which he or she is basing his or her expert opinions and conclusions;
 
(c)his or her expert opinions and conclusions, including a description of the methods, evidence and
information used in arriving at the conclusions. Documents on which the Tribunal-Appointed Expert
relies that have not already been submitted shall be provided;
 
(d)if the Expert Report has been translated, a statement as to the language in which it was originally
prepared, and the language in which the Tribunal-Appointed Expert anticipates giving testimony at the
Evidentiary Hearing;
 
(e)an affirmation of his or her genuine belief in the opinions expressed in the Expert Report;
 
(f)the signature of the Tribunal-Appointed Expert and its date and place; and
 
(g)if the Expert Report has been signed by more than one person, an attribution of the entirety or specific
parts of the Expert Report to each author.
 
5.The Arbitral Tribunal shall send a copy of such Expert Report to the Parties. The Parties may examine
any information, Documents, goods, samples, property, machinery, systems, processes or site for inspection
that the Tribunal-Appointed Expert has examined and any correspondence between the Arbitral Tribunal and
the Tribunal-Appointed Expert. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, any Party shall have the
opportunity to respond to the Expert Report in a submission by the Party or through a Witness Statement
or an Expert Report by a Party-Appointed Expert. The Arbitral Tribunal shall send the submission, Witness
Statement or Expert Report to the Tribunal-Appointed Expert and to the other Parties.
 
6.At the request of a Party or of the Arbitral Tribunal, the Tribunal-Appointed Expert shall be present at an
Evidentiary Hearing. The Arbitral Tribunal may question the Tribunal-Appointed Expert, and he or she may
be questioned by the Parties or by any Party-Appointed Expert on issues raised in his or her Expert Report,

Article 25(3): Appointment by Tribunal of an expert, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407064 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
the Parties’ submissions or Witness Statement or the Expert Reports made by the Party-Appointed Experts
pursuant to Article 6.5.”
25-52
As art.6(7) of the IBA Rules on Evidence states, it is up to the Tribunal and not the expert to decide the issues. The expert,
whether party-appointed or Tribunal-appointed, is intended to provide a technical opinion. The drafters of the Rules may have
seen no need to state the obvious, but it cannot hurt to sometimes reiterate a basic point of procedure, as does art.6(7) of the
IBA Rules on Evidence.
25-53
In ICC Case No.12131, a Tribunal sitting in Switzerland set out its position as to the respective roles of the Tribunal and the
Tribunal-appointed expert in the following terms:
 
“207.Given the Arbitral Tribunal did not have the specialized knowledge with respect to the technical issues
raised by the determination of each item of the claimed X know- how set forth in Claimant’s Annex A, it
appointed upon Claimant’s request and notwithstanding Respondent’s objection thereto a tribunal-appointed
expert …
 
209.In terms of weighing the evidence, one should bear in mind that the Tribunal is not bound by the Expert’s
finding. However, should the arbitrators decide to have differing opinions from those of the Expert, they
ought to provide grounds for their solution in order to preclude any oversight or violation of the right to be
heard (see Poudret/Besson, Droit comparé de l’arbitrage international, ed.2002, p.595). In other words, there
are no reasons for the Arbitral Tribunal to divert from the Expert’s findings, unless there is an objectively
justified material and different solution …” 379
Footnotes
370
With respect to party-appointed experts, art.5(2) of the IBA Rules on Evidence states that the report of the expert shall
contain: “(a) the full name and address of the Party-Appointed Expert, a statement regarding his or her present and past
relationship (if any) with any of the Parties, their legal advisors and the Arbitral Tribunal, and a description of his or her
background, qualifications, training and experience; (b) a description of the instructions pursuant to which he or she is
providing his or her opinions and conclusions; (c) a statement of his or her independence from the Parties, their legal
advisors and the Arbitral Tribunal; (d) a statement of the facts on which he or she is basing his or her expert opinions
and conclusions; (e) his or her expert opinions and conclusions, including a description of the methods, evidence and
information used in arriving at the conclusions. Documents on which the Party-Appointed Expert relies that have not
already been submitted shall be provided; (f) if the Expert Report has been translated, a statement as to the language in
which it was originally prepared, and the language in which the Party Appointed Expert anticipates giving testimony at
the Evidentiary Hearing; (g) an affirmation of his or her genuine belief in the opinions expressed in the Expert Report;
(h) the signature of the Party-Appointed Expert and its date and place; and (i) if the Expert Report has been signed by
more than one person, an attribution of the entirety or specific parts of the Expert Report to each author.”
371
See Voser and Mueller, “Appointment of Experts by the Arbitral Tribunal: the Civil Law Perspective” (2006) Business
Law International Vol.7 No.1, p.73; For examples of a Tribunal appointed expert, see ICC Case No.6057 (1990), (1993)
J. Int. Arb. No.4 p.1067, and ICC Case No.6673 (1992), (1992) J. Int. Arb. No.4 p.992, note Hascher. Regarding the
consequences of failure of one party to cooperate with the Tribunal appointed expert, see ICC Case No.6497 (1994),
(1999) YBCA Vol.XXIV p.71. For an example of a Tribunal appointed expert and a discussion of his procedure and report
in the context of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal, see Ebrahimi v Iran Award in Cases Nos 44 46 47 (560–44/46/47–3) of 12
October 1994, 30 Iran-US C.T.R. 170. See decision of Swiss Federal Supreme Court 4A_617/2010, the Swiss Federal
Supreme Court dismissed an appeal to set aside an arbitral award holding that the right to the appointment of an expert
by the Tribunal is not violated where the respective request was not made in a timely manner; Dougherty, Sblendorio
and Diana, “The Use of Tribunal-Appointed Experts in International commercial Arbitration: Practical Observations
and a Proposal for Ensuring Fairness” (2017), TDM, Vol.14 No.2, p.6.

Article 25(3): Appointment by Tribunal of an expert, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407064 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
372
See ICC Case No.13772 (2006) (Procedural Order), unreported (refusal of the Tribunal to appoint an expert upon
request of a party) (“[32]. There is very little in the ICC Rules and the Terms of Reference upon which to ground the
proposition that the tribunal-appointed experts are subsidiary to an obligation upon the parties themselves to put forth
the evidence they wish to rely on and make their case … [35]. The leading commentaries on the ICC Rules provide
support for the proposition that in ICC arbitrations the appointment of an expert by the arbitral tribunal is subsidiary to an
obligation upon the parties themselves to put forth the evidence they wish to rely on and make their case. [36]. Bühler and
Webster state that: The usual procedure is to have party-appointed experts. Article 25(4) therefore deals with a situation,
which in practice has probably become the exception. [37]. Derains and Schwartz affirm in relation to Article 25(4) of
the ICC Rules that: The [tribunal- appointed] expert also should not be used to discharge either party of any obligation
that it may have to prove its case, although the extent of a party’s related burden may be perceived differently in various
legal systems … [39]. In this case Respondents have not provided a statement from an accountant or auditor at arm’s
length from Respondents. That is the nature of the expert whom Respondents would have the Arbitral Tribunal appoint
in the Request. [40]. Respondents have contended that the Confidentiality Agreement entails a material restriction on
an expert of this nature appointed by Respondents from having access to Claimant’s documents and that a tribunal-
appointed expert would be better positioned to do so. [41]. This is, however, not the case … [44]. Again, Respondent
could commission an expert from outside of their organizations … The Arbitral Tribunal is of the view that Respondents
are at no material disadvantaged in obtaining their own expert’s report on the matters indicated in the Request. In view
of the subsidiarity of the tribunal- appointed experts, this is a sufficient ground upon, which to reject the Request …”);
ICC Case No.4629 (1989), (1993) YBCA Vol.XVIII p.11. In this case, the Tribunal denied a request for a second expert in
the following terms: “[t]he arbitrators are at liberty to decide whether such an appointment is necessary for the solution
of the case. Such an expert may be useful or even necessary for technical questions. In the present situation, such utility
is in no way established. On the contrary, the questions which are typically in the field of activity of an expert have
already been covered by the [first expert’s] report. This report describes the work done by the defendant party and is
necessary for the determination of the payment claimed by the Claimants. Other questions such as the ones quoted by
Respondent are to be resolved by the arbitrators. Moreover, it is their duty to interpret the contractual documents and
evidences filed by the parties. Appointing a second expert would lead to a replacement of the arbitrators by an expert.
Therefore, independently from the question of the cost of an expertise, the request of Respondent is to be dismissed.”
See also Fouchard, Gaillard & Goldman, op. cit., para.1290, at pp.703–704 (“… the arbitral tribunal is never required
to grant a party’s request for the appointment of an expert. In its 1980 decision in the Air Intergulf v S.E.C.A. case, the
Paris Court of Appeal held that where the tribunal considers that it has sufficient information to make its decision, its
refusal to order … the expert investigation requested by a party does not contravene the rights of defense”).
373
Article 3.2.b. of the Prague Rules expressly contemplates this possibility, as part of the proactive role that the Tribunal
is encouraged to take in establishing the facts pursuant to art.3.1.
374
In national court proceedings, this seems to be a lesser issue, as there are lists of approved experts and there is generally
no or a much lesser concern about neutrality of the nationality of the expert.
375
The ICC International Center for Expertise was created in 1976, and administers the procedures described in the ICC
Expert Rules (in force as from 1 February 2015): https://iccwbo.org/content/uploads/sites/3/2015/01/2015-ICC-Expert-
Rules-ENGLISH-version-1.pdf [accessed 28 April 2021].
376
Wolrich, “ICC Expertise—The New, Revised ICC Rules for Expertise: A presentation and Commentary” [2002] ICC
ICArb. Bull. Vol.13 No.2, p.11, See Section XXVI(B) of the 2021 ICC Note, Doc.3.1.
377
Otherwise the arbitrator engages his personal liability. The arbitrator can open a separate trust account, into which the
advance to cover the expert’s costs can be paid, or have it deposited into an account held by the ICC, see 2021 ICC
Note, para.247, Doc.3.1.
378
It would not make sense to require consultation with the parties prior to receiving the expert report. Therefore,
grammatically the consultation requirement appears to solely apply to the appointment of the expert.
379
ICC Case No.12131 (2006) (Partial Award), unreported.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
