Article 23(1)(g), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407015 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 23(1)(g)
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 23(1)(g)
“particulars of the applicable procedural rules and, if such is the case, reference to the power conferred upon the arbitral
tribunal to act as amiable compositeur or to decide ex aequo et bono.”
23-57
As noted above, the Terms of Reference do not usually set out the detailed procedure for the arbitration. 308  Instead, Tribunals
use their authority under art.19 and art.22 to establish such procedure by procedural orders, which they can and will establish
in consultation with the parties, but for which they do not need the agreement of the parties, unlike in the case of the Terms
of Reference. With respect to particulars of the applicable procedural rules in the Terms of Reference, the practice in ICC
arbitration varies extensively.
23-58
Many Tribunals favour maximising discretion and hence flexibility for the Tribunal. Other Tribunals draft the Terms of
Reference to set out a detailed outline for the procedure. The approach to adopt depends in many instances on the arbitrators
and counsel involved in the arbitration. Therefore, it is perhaps more useful to examine certain procedural rules that generally
are or are not found in Terms of Reference.
23-59
For example, it is rare for a Tribunal to provide that specific rules of national procedure will be followed in whole or in part. 309
Indeed, the Terms of Reference are sometimes used as an occasion to change from a national procedure if such a procedure
has been provided for in the arbitration agreement. The reason is that international arbitration does not generally follow any
national procedure.
23-60
Since their initial adoption in 1999 (and as last revised in 2020), the IBA Rules on Evidence have been widely cited in legal
materials. 310  Moreover, as discussed under art.25, various Tribunals have expressed the view either in the Terms of Reference
or in procedural orders that they would be guided by those principles in deciding procedural issues that regard witness and/or
documentary testimony. 311  It is preferable to have such a reference to the guidance of the IBA Rules on Evidence in the Terms
of Reference if the parties agree, as it is then part of the parties’ agreement as to the procedure.
23-61
The Terms of Reference may also set out certain evidentiary rules, such as that all documents are presumed to be authentic and
complete even though furnished in photocopies, unless their authenticity is challenged by the other party. 312
23-62
The Terms of Reference may include a provision on the Tribunal’s right, and that of any expert appointed by the Tribunal, to
visit the site. Such a provision may also deal with the notice requirements and other procedural aspects of such site inspection.
23-63

Article 23(1)(g), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407015 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
It is not unusual for the Terms of Reference to provide that the president of the Tribunal may take some decisions on his initiative.
The Terms of Reference may state, for instance, that the president has the right to call meetings and to set and extend time limits
on behalf of the Tribunal, or that the president may issue procedural orders with his signature alone, after such consultation
with the co-arbitrators and counsel as he considers appropriate in light of the nature and urgency of the matters dealt with in
such orders. In cases of urgency, the president may even be expressly authorised to act without a prior attempt to consult with
his fellow arbitrators.
23-64
Issues of confidentiality are specifically referred to in art.22(3). However, since many parties are interested in the confidentiality
of the arbitral proceedings, they may find it opportune to include a clause on confidentiality in the Terms of Reference to protect
their rights and the documents submitted by them during the course of the proceedings. The following language could be used
if agreed to by all parties and the Tribunal:
“Unless the parties expressly agree in writing to the contrary, the parties undertake to keep confidential all awards
and orders in the present arbitration, together with all materials in the proceedings created for the purpose of the
arbitration and all other documents produced by any party in the proceedings, save to the sole extent that disclosure
may be required of a party by a legal duty, to protect or pursue a legal right, or to enforce or challenge an award
in bona fide legal proceedings before a State Court or other judicial authority. The parties also undertake to use
their best efforts to ensure that the terms of the present paragraph are respected by witnesses, experts, counsel
and any other individuals who may be granted access to the materials referred to above in the context of those
proceedings.” 313
23-65
If one party does not accept the inclusion of a confidentiality undertaking in the Terms of Reference, the Tribunal may
nevertheless consider ordering the confidential treatment of anything in relation to the arbitration by issuing a Procedural Order.
23-66
The power of the Tribunal to decide as amiable compositeur or ex aequo et bono has been discussed under art.21(3). In drafting
the Terms of Reference, if it is proposed to insert such a provision, then the parties should seek to agree on its terms, as the
terms do not have the same meaning in various jurisdictions.
23-67
A related issue is whether the Terms of Reference give the Tribunal the right to mediate the dispute. In arbitrations that are
influenced by German, Austrian or Swiss law, the Tribunal may feel that it is appropriate and even preferable to have the
Tribunal encourage a settlement of the dispute. 314
23-68
However, this is not the tradition in the common law countries for example. One of the main issues in this respect is the extent to
which the members of the Tribunal may have ex parte contact with one of the parties. The other aspect is that, in many instances,
to be effective, a mediator expresses a preliminary view as to the merits. This can give rise to an objection by a party who feels
that the member of the Tribunal or the Tribunal as a whole has pre-judged an issue.
Footnotes
308
See para.23-5.
309
See the discussion under art.19 at para.19-13.
310
See Pt III, App.4.
311
See the discussion under art.25 at para.25-4 and following.
312
In order for such a challenge to be made in a timely fashion, it may be advisable to set a time limit in the Terms of
Reference to challenge the authenticity of a document. If not challenged within that period, the right to challenge the

Article 23(1)(g), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407015 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
authenticity of the document would then be deemed to have been waived. In any event, the Tribunal should, at its
discretion, be authorised to require the production of any originals.
313
On the general issue of confidentiality in arbitration, see the discussion under art.22(3).
314
See Schneider, “Combining Arbitration with Conciliation” (1996) ICCA Congress Series No.8, p.57, who describes
the differing positions in common law as well as civil law countries. In the author’s experience, such differences still
exist nowadays. See Draetta, “Leveraging the Arbitral Process to Encourage Settlement: Some Practical and Legal
Issues” (2010), in Fernández-Ballesteros & Arias (eds), Liber Amicorum Bernardo Cremades, pp.361–374; Raeschke-
Kessler, “The Arbitrator as Settlement Facilitator” (2005) Arb. Int. Vol. 21 No.4, pp.143–146.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
