Section D. - Procedures for Bringing a Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638666 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section D. - Procedures for Bringing a Challenge
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 10 - Challenge of Arbitral Awards
Section D. - Procedures for Bringing a Challenge
10. 86
The grounds for bringing a challenge against an international arbitral award are, as we have said, broadly similar in courts across
the world. If a challenge is to be brought, it will have to be brought at the ‘designated court’ (to use the terminology of the
Model Law) at the seat of the arbitration. However, since that seat was probably chosen as a ‘neutral’ place of arbitration, it is
possible that the lawyers who acted in the arbitral proceedings are not qualified to bring a challenge before the designated court.
For example, a UK practitioner who represents a client in a New York seated arbitration would not be qualified to prepare and
argue a challenge before the US District Court for the Southern District of New York. If that is the case, then the party seeking
to challenge will have to hire competent local counsel experienced to advise and represent it in the challenge proceedings. 142
10. 87
Local counsel will be able to advise on the procedural steps necessary for the challenge. Important questions will include:
 
•the appropriate court before which to bring the application;
 
•the relevant time limits for such an application to be made;
 
•the necessary documentation to be filed (and often translations of those documents to the language of the court 143 );
 
•the grounds upon which an application can be made;
 
•the form and number of written submissions;
 
•whether (and in what form) there will be an oral hearing;
 
•whether an appeal or cassation will be possible and, if so, the scope of such appeal; and
 
•whether an application to set aside suspends the ability to recognise or enforce the award. 144
10. 88
By way of example, in a Paris seated arbitration the challenge is made in the first instance to the Paris Court of Appeal. 145  The
unsuccessful party may then challenge the decision of the Court of Appeal on limited grounds to the Court of Cassation (the
French Supreme Court). However, the Court of Cassation may only annul (in whole or in part) the decision of the Paris Court
of Appeal and if it does so, it must remit the case to another section of the Paris Court of Appeal to redecide the challenge in
light of its decision. 146  By way of contrast, in the United States, the award is challenged before the federal district court in
the district where the award was made. 147  Any decision of the district court may then be appealed to the competent US circuit
court of appeals which will usually determine the matter finally (with the very limited exception of a case which seeks and
obtains permission to appeal to the US Supreme Court). 148
Footnotes
142
Conscious of the need to provide a ‘one stop shop’ for clients, some of the larger international arbitration groups of
international law firms have built up teams of arbitration specialists who are also experienced litigators in challenge
proceedings. This will often involve building multijurisdictional teams across offices.

Section D. - Procedures for Bringing a Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638666 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
143
For example, a recent investment arbitration with a seat in the Hague (Manuel Garcia Armas v Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, PCA Case No. 2016-08) was heard and decided in Spanish. However, challenge proceedings had to be
launched before the Dutch courts in the Hague which required the translations of (inter alia) the award.
144
For the answers to these questions in key arbitral jurisdictions see Rowley (general ed.); Gaillard, Kaiser, and Siino (eds);
(Foreword, Redfern) The Guide to Challenging and Enforcing Arbitration Awards (2nd edn, Law Business Research
Limited, 2021), Part II.
145
Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1519 (the cour d’appel de Paris which has territorial jurisdiction over the place where the
award was rendered).
146
See, e.g., Serafin Garcia Armas and ors v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in which the claimants obtained a favourable
jurisdictional award in a Paris seated investment arbitration. Venezuela challenged the award before the cour d’appel de
Paris (Pole 1 Chambre 1) and obtained a partial annulment (Paris cour d’appel, 25 April 2017). The decision of the cour
d’appel de Paris was appealed to the cour de cassation which rendered a judgment on 13 February 2019 overturning the
cour d’appel de Paris’s decision. The cour de cassation then remitted the case for decision to another section of the cour
d’appel de Paris (Pole 5 Chambre 16) which rendered its decision on 3 June 2020. That decision was in turn appealed
by the claimants to the cour de cassation which, in a second judgment of 1 December 2021, overturned the judgment of
the cour d’appel de Paris. The matter has now been remitted to a new section of the cour d’appel de Paris.
147
9 U.S.C., § 10.
148
See, e.g., the case of BG Group v Argentina, where the claimant won an investment arbitration with a seat in Washington
DC. The respondent, Argentina challenged the award before the competent federal court, the District Court of the District
of Columbia. When the District Court affirmed the award (764 F. Supp. 2d 21 (DC 2011)), Argentina appealed to the
DC Circuit Court of Appeals and won (665 F.3d 1363 (2012)). BG Group then applied for certiorari (that is, permission
to appeal to the US Supreme Court). The application was granted and BG Group subsequently prevailed in the only
investment arbitration to be reviewed by the US Supreme Court (572 US 25, 134 S.Ct. 1198 (2014)).
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
