Primacy of Contract, if any, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407038 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Primacy of Contract, if any
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Primacy of Contract, if any
21-57
In many if not most commercial arbitrations, the Tribunal begins its analysis with the terms of the contract and reverts to it
as the central point in the deliberations. It is rare that a party succeeds in maintaining that the contract is null and void. In an
analysis of a number of ICC awards, Professor Jolivet summarised the situation as follows: 161
“Reviews of arbitral awards since 1988 show that the parties only rarely base their arguments on the nullity of the
contract or of some of its provisions. When nullity is invoked, it is almost always in defence by the Respondent
in the arbitral proceedings. Arbitral tribunals acting under the auspices of the ICC Rules appear to have accepted
partial or total nullity only rarely.
For example, applying Swiss law an arbitral tribunal refused the annulment on the basis of nemo auditor propriam
turpitudinem allegans and good faith. Each party knew the provisions of the contract and to invoke nullity in
violation of good faith would amount to an abuse of right.
Only in several tens of cases since 1988 has the request to nullify the contract been accepted. For example, the
nullity of the contract was accepted for the illegality of commissions paid to obtain a contract, or the negotiation
or renegotiation of a contract …
The existence of parallel proceedings, whether before state courts or arbitral proceedings, may influence the
decision of the arbitral tribunal. For example, a tribunal accepted the admissibility of a plea for annulment of a
contract but deferred its decision pending a decision in a criminal case.”
21-58
The principles of interpretation vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. 162  In particular, in most non-common law jurisdictions
there is no equivalent to the “parole evidence rule”. Therefore, the contract will frequently be read within the context of the
drafts that were prepared of it and the actions that the parties took under it. In this respect, the UNIDROIT Principles are perhaps
closer to the civil law approach. 163
21-59
As noted above, in revising the 1998 Rules, the role of states involved in ICC arbitrations, be it in commercial disputes, or
treaty-based investment disputes was given particular attention. As regards investment disputes, there exists “no privity,” i.e. no
contract between the investor and subsequent claimant on the one side, and the investor’s host state, and subsequent respondent,
on the other side. 164  In these cases, the invitation in art.21(2) to take into account the provisions of the contract would be
meaningless. By adding the words “if any”, and deleting the reference to “in all cases” in the 2012 Rules, this provision better
fits the situation prevailing in investment disputes. 165
Footnotes

Primacy of Contract, if any, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407038 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
161
Authors’ translation. Jolivet, “L’annulation du contrat par les arbitres dans l’arbitrage CCI” (2005) Cahiers de
l’Arbitrage, Vol.3, p.14. (The awards are in French.) The author of the article suggests that Tribunals are basically
seeking to save the contract.
162
Hence, the need to decide the applicable rules of law, where the parties have not done so; see above para.21-12.
163
Article 4.3 of the UNIDROIT Principles states: “In applying Articles 4.1 and 4.2, regard shall be had to all the
circumstances, including: (a) preliminary negotiations between the parties; (b) practices which the parties have
established between themselves; (c) the conduct of the parties subsequent to the conclusion of the contract; (d) the
nature and purpose of the contract; (e) the meaning commonly given to terms and expressions in the trade concerned;
(f) usages.”
164
Paulsson, Arbitration without Privity, (1995) ICSID REV. Vol.10, p.232.
165
2012 Secretariat's Guide, para.3-779.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
