Article 23(2): Signing of the Terms of Reference by the..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 23(2): Signing of the Terms of Reference by the parties
and the Tribunal
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 23(2): Signing of the Terms of Reference by the parties and the Tribunal
“The Terms of Reference shall be signed by the parties and the arbitral tribunal. Within 30 days from the date on which
the file has been transmitted to it, the arbitral tribunal shall transmit to the Court the Terms of Reference signed by it and
by the parties. The Court may extend this time limit pursuant to a reasoned request from the arbitral tribunal or on its own
initiative if it decides it is necessary to do so.”
23-69
Article 23(2) imposes an obligation on the parties and the members of the Tribunal to sign the Terms of Reference. Once signed,
the Terms of Reference have a binding effect on the parties and the Tribunal. However, a party should not and cannot be forced
to waive any right it may have with respect to the arbitration by the signing of the Terms of Reference. Therefore, if a party
believes that there is a danger that it will be waiving a right or that it will be accepting some additional obligation that it does
not wish to accept, it may object to signing the Terms of Reference. In most instances, the Tribunal will then seek to clarify the
Terms of Reference so that it is a neutral document and does not involve any commitment to which a party reasonably objects.
If, despite the Tribunal’s efforts, the party refuses to sign the Terms of Reference, the Tribunal may refer the matter to the ICC
Court in accordance with art.23(3).
23-70
The parties sign either on their own behalf or through their authorised representatives. Normally, the Tribunal will ensure that
the parties’ representatives provide proof of due authorisation, such as a power of attorney, to sign the Terms of Reference.
Article 17 expressly permits the Tribunal to require the parties to submit proof of authorisation. It remains, however, for each
Tribunal to decide whether it considers it appropriate to request a power of attorney or any other proof of authority to sign the
Terms of Reference as provided for in art.17.
23-71
Whereas in the past the Terms of Reference were to be signed within two months of the transmittal of the file to the Tribunal,
this timeline has been reduced to 30 days as of 1 March 2017, when the 2017 Rules came into force. In many instances, this
two-month period was met, unless there existed a problem, with conflicting schedules of the Tribunal and counsel (for instance
during the summer holiday break), or with corporate authorisation, for example. The reduced time-limit of 30 days will often
be insufficient to have the Terms of Reference signed at the occasion of the case management conference, in particular, when
the arbitrators and counsel reside in different countries and want to have a physical meeting. 315  The reduced time-limit lead
the Tribunal to keep the content of the Terms of Reference to its strict minimum, in order to not have lengthy discussion with
the parties. The Tribunal may request an extension with a brief letter addressed to the Secretariat of the ICC Court setting out
the reason for the delay. In fact, the ICC Court will frequently grant the initial extension automatically. For any subsequent
extension, the court will take into consideration the development of the procedure for establishing the Terms of Reference to
assess whether and what extension is justified. The extension should normally be requested by the Tribunal which has to provide
the reasons of such a request. In assessing the reasons for the extension, one of the factors considered by the court will be the
attitude of the parties as regards the delay. 316
23-72

Article 23(2): Signing of the Terms of Reference by the..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
The Terms of Reference are to be signed by each party and each member of the Tribunal. They can be signed in one single
document or in as many counterparts as there are signatories. The Secretariat no longer requires an original copy of the Terms of
Reference before submitting them, for information, to the ICC Court. It will accept a PDF copy of the signed Terms of Reference
by email or any other means, provided a record of the sending thereof exists. Generally, an original of the signed Terms of
Reference must, however, be provided to the Secretariat. 317  The Secretariat is copied by the Tribunal on drafts of the Terms of
Reference prior to the signing and will review them to ensure that there are no missing elements. 318  If there is a problem with
the draft Terms of Reference, the Secretariat will inform the Tribunal. There is no reference in art.23 to the ICC Court rejecting
Terms of Reference signed by the parties and the Tribunal. However, it is conceivable where the ICC Court sees a risk that the
procedure set out would not be in compliance with the basic requirements of the Rules and/or raise issues as to the enforceability
of any award. In such a case, the ICC Court may well intervene and request the Tribunal to amend the Terms of Reference
accordingly. Although the ICC Court is not a party to the Terms of Reference, it has a general duty of supervision of the Terms of
Reference in each case. This duty is the direct result of the ICC Court’s function to ensure the application of the Rules, art.1(2).
23-73
In some instances, one party may object to delays in signing or submitting the Terms of Reference. The delays can be caused
by the other party or by the Tribunal or by a combination of the two. Usually, if delay is raised, the other persons involved
raise various justifications for the delay. Since the ICC Court prefers to have Terms of Reference that are signed by all parties,
reasonable delay tends to be tolerated provided that there is no overwhelming need to proceed urgently. At some point, delay
in signing the Terms of Reference may amount to a breach of the Rules, and may give rise to a request for removal of the
arbitrators. This is likely to happen only in most exceptional circumstances, and has happened in at least one instance that the
authors are aware of, since the time they were members of the ICC Court.
Footnotes
315
As noted at para.24-29, case management conferences by video or telephone have become almost the norm since the
outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020, and in all likelihood physical meetings will remain the exception, in
particular when they involve significant travel and/or scheduling problems for their participants.
316
See para.23-74 and following.
317
2021 Note, para.196, Doc.3.1. However, during the Covid-19 pandemic, only electronic copies of the Terms of Reference
were provided in many instances.
318
See para.23-72.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
