Section D. - How Many Arbitrators?, UKBC-REDFERN 530638628 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section D. - How Many Arbitrators?
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 4 - Establishment and Organisation of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section D. - How Many Arbitrators?
(a) Introduction
4. 16
The establishment of an arbitral tribunal involves many considerations. First, should there be more than one arbitrator, and if
so, how many more ? Some national laws sensibly provide that the number of arbitrators must be uneven. Clauses providing for
two arbitrators and an ‘umpire’, used historically in shipping and commodities disputes, are now largely relics and in any event
unsuitable for contemporary international arbitration. 32  Tribunals of five (or more) arbitrators are best reserved for arbitrations
between sovereign states. 33  In commercial cases, the choice is usually between one arbitrator and three, and in investment
arbitrations, it is usual for three members to be appointed.
(b) Sole arbitrators
4. 17
Article 12.2 of the ICC Rules provides that, where the parties have not agreed upon the number of arbitrators, the Court shall
appoint a sole arbitrator unless it appears to the Court that ‘the dispute is such as to warrant the appointment of three arbitrators’.
Following the same policy, Article 5.8 of the LCIA Rules states: ‘A sole arbitrator shall be appointed unless the parties have
agreed in writing otherwise or the LCIA Court determines that in the circumstances a three-member tribunal is appropriate (or,
exceptionally, more than three).’
4. 18
The ICDR Rules adopt a similar approach, with a sole arbitrator being the default solution, although the size and complexity of
the case will be taken into account in the decision as to whether or not to constitute a three-member tribunal. Article 12 provides:
If the parties have not agreed on the number of arbitrators, one arbitrator shall be appointed unless the
Administrator determines that three arbitrators are appropriate because of the size, complexity, or other
circumstances of the case. 34
4. 19
The advantages of referring a dispute to a sole arbitrator are self-evident. Appointments for meetings or hearings can more
easily be arranged. The interests of economy are also served since the parties will have to bear the fees and expenses of only
one arbitrator. Moreover, the arbitral proceedings should be completed more quickly, since (obviously) a sole arbitrator does
not need to ‘deliberate’ with colleagues to arrive at an agreed, or majority, decision. If the parties to an international arbitration
are able to agree upon the appointment of a sole arbitrator, it makes sense for them to do so, unless the amounts in dispute are
so high that it seems more prudent to appoint three arbitrators. The disadvantages of a sole arbitrator include a possibly greater
risk of error since sole arbitrators do not benefit from a broader discussion of the case with their co-arbitrators. 35
4. 20

Section D. - How Many Arbitrators?, UKBC-REDFERN 530638628 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Where the agreement provides for a sole arbitrator, and the parties cannot agree on the person to be appointed, an arbitrator
will be chosen for them by a national court or by an agreed appointing authority 36  (thus depriving the parties of one of the
fundamental benefits of arbitration, namely participating in the choice of the tribunal).
4. 21
In practice, there is usually a preference for the appointment of three arbitrators in all but the smallest cases. The UNCITRAL
Rules reflect this preference by providing that if the parties have not previously agreed otherwise, three arbitrators will be
appointed 37  and a similar provision is contained in the Model Law. 38
(c) Three arbitrators
4. 22
The preference for international disputes to be referred to three arbitrators has much to commend it. It means that each party
will usually be entitled to nominate one arbitrator, leaving the third arbitrator to be chosen either by agreement of the parties,
or by the two party-appointed arbitrators, or by an institution. The advantage to a party of being able to nominate an arbitrator
is that it gives a sense of investment in the arbitral tribunal. Each party will have at least one ‘judge of its choice’ to listen
to its case. 39  This is particularly important in an international arbitration, where a party may select an arbitrator who will be
able to explain to the other tribunal members any differences of language, tradition, or culture between the parties. In addition,
party-appointed arbitrators can help to clarify the case advanced by their appointing party, whilst remaining independent and
impartial, and so fulfil a useful role in ensuring due process.
4. 23
A three-member tribunal is inevitably more expensive than one that consists of a sole arbitrator and it will usually take longer
to render its award. However, as already stated, the risk of an error of law or fact by a three-member tribunal is likely to be
lower than it is with a sole arbitrator.
(d) More than three arbitrators
4. 24
Even in a case of major importance, three carefully chosen and appropriately qualified arbitrators should be sufficient to dispose
satisfactorily of the issues in dispute. The occasional practice of states in agreeing inter-state arbitral tribunals of five, seven,
or more is usually dictated by political, rather than by practical, considerations.
Footnotes
32
The LMAA still recognises the possibility of two arbitrators and an umpire in its Rules (LMAA Terms 2021, Art. 9) but,
absent a specific agreement on the number of arbitrators, three arbitrators will be appointed (LMAA Terms, Art. 8.a).
33
For example, Mexico v USA (Cross-Border Trucking) USA-98-2008-01, 6 February 2001, in which one of the authors
was the chair of the tribunal, available online at http://www.nafta-sec-alena.org/. The USMCA, like its predecessor
the NAFTA, provides for the appointment of a ‘panel’ of five members in inter-state disputes without calling them
‘arbitrators’ (Art. 31.9.1(a)). Other examples may be found online at http://www.pca-cpa.org/, e.g. Ireland v United
Kingdom (Mox Plant), an arbitration pursuant to Annex VII of UNCLOS, and Channel Tunnel Group Ltd and France-
Manche SA v United Kingdom and France, UNCITRAL, PCA, Partial Award, 30 January 2007, IIC 58 (2007), an
arbitration brought under a concession agreement between the parties in accordance with Art. 19 of the Treaty of
Canterbury between the United Kingdom and France, dated 12 February 1986. A more recent example is The ‘Enrica

Section D. - How Many Arbitrators?, UKBC-REDFERN 530638628 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Lexie’ Incident (Italy v India), PCA Case No. 2015-28. In 2018, an award was rendered by the first ever five-member
ICC tribunal in PT Ventures v Unitel, ICC Case No. 21404/ASM.
34
Pursuant to the ICDR Rules, Art. 1.1, the ICDR is the ‘administrator’ of the rules.
35
An error in an arbitral award is potentially more serious in arbitration since, unlike the courts where errors by a first
instance judge sitting alone can be corrected on appeal, an arbitral award is generally final on the merits.
36
The procedure for the appointment of arbitrators is discussed at paragraphs 4.25ff.
37
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 7.1.
38
Model Law, Art. 10(2).
39
The expression ‘judge of its choice’ comes from the Hague Conventions on the Pacific Settlement of International
Disputes of 1899 (Art. 15) and 1907 (Art. 37). However, there is a debate as to the pros and cons of party appointments
within the arbitral process. See Paulsson, ‘Moral hazard in international dispute resolution’, Inaugural lecture as holder
of Michael R. Klein Distinguished Scholar Chair, University of Miami School of Law, Miami, FL, 29 April 2010;
Brower and Rosenberg, ‘The death of the two-headed nightingale: Why the Paulsson–van den Berg presumption that
party-appointed arbitrators are untrustworthy is wrongheaded’ (2013) 29 Arb Intl 43. See also the analysis in Gomez-
Acebo, Party-Appointed Arbitrators in International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2016).
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
