The Expeditious Determination Procedure, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406900 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
The Expeditious Determination Procedure
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
The Expeditious Determination Procedure
24-12
Unlike in national courts, there is no summary judgment mechanism generally available in international arbitration or under
the Rules. To increase efficiency in ICC arbitration the ICC has set out in the 2021 ICC Note provisions for Expeditious
Determination of Manifestly Unmeritorious Claims (the Expeditious Determination Procedure). 332  The current provision with
respect thereto are as follows:
 
“109.This section includes guidance as to how an application for the expeditious determination of manifestly
unmeritorious claims or defenses may be dealt with, within the broad scope of Article 22.
 
110.Any party may apply to the arbitral tribunal for the expeditious determination of one or more claims or
defences, on grounds that such claims or defences are manifestly devoid of merit or fall manifestly outside
the arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction (“application”). The application must be made as promptly as possible after
the filing of the relevant claims or defences.
 
111.The arbitral tribunal has full discretion to decide whether to allow the application to proceed, taking into
consideration any circumstances it considers to be relevant, including the stage of the proceedings and the
need to ensure time and cost efficiency.
 
112.If the arbitral tribunal allows the application to proceed it shall promptly adopt the procedural measures
it considers appropriate, after consulting the parties. The responding party or parties shall be given a fair
opportunity to answer the application. Further presentation of evidence will only be allowed in exceptional
circumstances.
 
113.The arbitral tribunal shall decide the application as promptly as possible, consistent with the nature of
the application, and may state the reasons for its decision in as concise a fashion as possible. The decision
may be in the form of an order or award. In either case, the arbitral tribunal may decide on the costs of the
application pursuant to Article 38 or reserve this decision to a later stage.
 
114.The Court will scrutinise any award made on an application for expeditious determination, typically
within one week of receipt by the Secretariat.”
24-13
As stated in para.109, the Expeditious Determination Procedure is subject to the provisions of the Rules and in particular art.22.
In fact, the Expeditious Determination Procedure is not referred to itself in the Rules. Therefore, to the extent that parties rely
upon it, parties are relying on the ICC Court’s interpretation of appropriate practices for an ICC arbitration.
24-14
In accordance with para.110, the Expeditious Determination Procedure is only intended to be applicable to claims or defences
that “manifestly devoid of merit or fall manifestly outside the scope of the arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction”. Whether an issue is so
devoid of merit or not will be the subject of debate. However, at the least it would cover claims that on the face of the pleadings are
devoid of merit or fall outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. In essence, the issue should be whether the claim or defence as pleaded

The Expeditious Determination Procedure, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406900 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
has any chance of success. As discussed under arts 4 and 5, the possibility of the application of the Expeditious Determination
Procedure renders a more precise and complete pleading of a party’s case in the Request and Answer more relevant.
24-15
In addition, one of the requirements of para.110 is that any application under the Expeditious Determination Procedure be made
“as promptly as possible after the filing of the relevant claims or defences”. This may occur at any time in the proceedings.
However, with respect to the parties’ basic claims filed with the Request, Answer and counterclaim or Request for Joinder,
the claims and defences will have been filed prior to the constitution of the Tribunal and therefore prior to the initial case
management conference. As a result any application for application of the Expeditious Determination Procedure with respect
to such claims should be made prior to the initial case management conference.
24-16
Paragraph 111 of the Expeditious Determination Procedure states that the Tribunal has full discretion to decide whether to allow
the application to proceed. In exercising that discretion, the Tribunal is to consider the stage of the proceedings and the need to
ensure time and cost efficiency. If an application under the Expeditious Determination Procedure meets the other requirements
discussed above and would be dispositive of the arbitration or a separable part of the arbitration, then it may be more efficient
to deal with it at the outset. However, bifurcation has a cost both in terms of time and money as is illustrated in the examples
referred to below.
24-17
Under para.112, the Tribunal is to consult the parties as to the appropriate procedure. This can be done during the case
management conference, for example. A party opposing the application must be given “a fair opportunity to answer the
application” in addition of course to an opportunity to meet the substance of the other party’s claim in accordance with the
requirements of art.22.
24-18
Paragraph 112 states that “Further presentation of evidence will only be allowed in exceptional circumstances”. This provision
relates back to the requirement that the claim or defence be manifestly devoid of merit or manifestly fall outside the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. If, on review of the application, the Tribunal determines that, to meet the requirements of art.22(4), a party should
be able to file material additional evidence, then the Expeditious Determination Procedure is not appropriate. If material cross
examination of a witness is required, then the Expeditious Determination Procedure is not appropriate.
24-19
Paragraph 113 refers to the possibility of deciding the application by a procedural order or award. The distinction between the
two is discussed under art.32. The ICC’s indication that any award under the Expeditious Determination Procedure will be
scrutinised in principle within one week in para.64 is another indicator that this procedure is to be used in straightforward cases.
24-20
All of the above suggest that the Expeditious Determination Procedure is focused on specific situations. The authors consider
that it may be appropriate in situations such as the following:
 
(1)With respect to a jurisdictional claim based on an interpretation of the arbitration clause itself where oral evidence as
to what was agreed is not relevant or not relied upon.
 
(2)To deal with defences to payment under a first demand guarantee in the absence of a claim of fraud or manifest error.
 
(3)To deal with the construction of a limitation of liability provision where oral evidence as to what was agreed is not
relevant or not relied upon.
Footnotes
332
The ICC has done so for the first time in its 2017 Note. As to the latter see para.0-7 and following.

The Expeditious Determination Procedure, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406900 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
