Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 11 - Recognition and Enforcement of Arbitral Awards
Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention
(a)Introduction
11. 39
The origins of the New York Convention have already been described in Chapter 1. The New York Convention replaced the
1927 Geneva Convention as between states that are parties to both Conventions, 38  and was a substantial improvement, since it
provides for a simpler and more effective method of obtaining recognition and enforcement of foreign awards. The Convention
also replaced the earlier 1923 Geneva Protocol as between states that are bound by both, 39  and again constitutes a substantial
improvement, because it gives much wider effect to the validity of arbitration agreements than that given under the Protocol.
As a result, the New York Convention has been rightly eulogised as ‘the single most important pillar on which the edifice
of international arbitration rests’, 40  and as a convention that ‘perhaps could lay claim to be the most effective instance of
international legislation in the entire history of commercial law’. 41  It is for this reason that, for now, many remain reluctant to
countenance the possible disruption that would accompany the modernisation of the Convention’s existing text. 42
(i)Enforcing the agreement to arbitrate
11. 40
Although the title of the New York Convention refers only to the recognition and enforcement of ‘foreign arbitral awards’,
the Convention also deals with the recognition and enforcement of arbitration agreements. This has already been discussed
in Chapter 1. In this chapter, the focus is on only the recognition and enforcement of ‘foreign arbitral awards’.
(ii)Enforcing foreign awards
11. 41
The New York Convention adopts a strikingly internationalist attitude in its opening statement, despite its title referring to
‘foreign awards’ rather than to ‘international awards’ as some proponents at the time, including particularly the ICC, would
have wished. It says:
This Convention shall apply to the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards made in the territory of a
State other than the State where the recognition and enforcement of such awards are sought, and arising out of
differences between persons, whether physical or legal. It shall also apply to arbitral awards not considered as
domestic awards in the State where their recognition and enforcement are sought. 43
If this opening statement were to stand without qualification, it would mean that an award made in any state (even if that
state were not a party to the New York Convention) would be recognised and enforced by any other state that was a party
so long as the award satisfied the basic conditions set down in the Convention. There is, however, a qualification: Article
I(3) of the Convention allows states that adhere to it to make two possible reservations. The first of these is the ‘reciprocity
reservation’; the second is the ‘commercial reservation’, which was also in the 1923 Geneva Protocol.

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
(iii)First reservation—reciprocity
11. 42
Article I(3) of the New York Convention provides that:
When signing, ratifying or acceding to this Convention, or notifying extension under Article X hereof,
any State may on the basis of reciprocity declare that it will apply the Convention to the recognition and
enforcement of awards made only in the territory of another Contracting State.
To the extent that states take advantage of it, the reciprocity reservation has the effect of narrowing the scope of application
of the New York Convention. Instead of applying to all international arbitral awards wherever they are made, the application
of the New York Convention may be limited to ‘Convention awards’—that is, to awards made in a state that is a party to
the New York Convention. 45
11. 43
States that have entered into the New York Convention on the basis of reciprocity have agreed, in effect, that they will
recognise and enforce only Convention awards. Accordingly, when seeking a suitable state in which to hold an international
commercial arbitration, it is advisable to select a state that has adopted the New York Convention, so as to improve the
chances of securing recognition and enforcement of the award in other Convention countries.
11. 44
The limiting effect of the first reservation should not be exaggerated. The number of states that make up the international
network for the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards established by the New York Convention grows year by
year. The Convention now links the world’s major trading nations: Arab, African, Asian, and Latin American, as well as
European and North American. As more countries become Convention countries, the reciprocity reservation becomes less
significant. The Model Law, for example, in Articles 35 and 36, requires the recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award
‘irrespective of the country in which it was made’. This reflects the ‘dream’ of a truly international award, where the place of
arbitration is irrelevant and an award has no nationality, rather than the approach of the New York Convention which speaks
of ‘foreign awards’ located in a particular ‘place’ or ‘seat’ of arbitration. 46
(iv)Second reservation—commercial relationships
11. 45
Article I(3) of the New York Convention contains a further reservation. This entitles a contracting state to declare that it
will apply the Convention only to those differences arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or not, that are
‘considered as commercial under the national law of the state making such declaration’. 47
11. 46
The effect of this reservation, like the reservation as to reciprocity, is to narrow the scope of application of the New
York Convention, 48  and the fact that each contracting state may determine for itself what relationships it considers to
be ‘commercial’ has created problems in the application of the New York Convention. Relationships that are regarded
as ‘commercial’ by one state are not necessarily so regarded by others—and this does not assist in obtaining a uniform
interpretation of the Convention. Indeed, the commercial reservation has led to difficulties of interpretation even within the
same state, as is shown by two cases that arose in India. In the first, 49  the High Court of Bombay (now Mumbai) was asked
to stay legal proceedings that had been commenced despite the existence of an arbitration agreement. Under the relevant
Indian legislation enacting the New York Convention, the court was obliged to grant such a stay, as long as the arbitration
agreement came within the Convention. In ratifying the New York Convention, India had entered the commercial reservation.

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
The court held that whilst the agreement under which the dispute arose was commercial in nature, it could not be considered
to be commercial ‘under the law in force in India’:
In my opinion, in order to invoke the provisions of [the Convention], it is not enough to establish that an
agreement is commercial. It must also be established that it is commercial by virtue of a provision of law or
an operative legal principle in force in India. 50
11. 47
This decision was subsequently disapproved by the High Court of Gujarat. In this second case, 51  the plaintiffs moved for
a stay of legal proceedings that, again, had been commenced despite the existence of an arbitration agreement. The court
granted this motion. On the argument as to whether or not the contract was commercial in nature, the judge said that the
term ‘commerce’:
is a word of the largest import and takes in its sweep all the business and trade transactions in any of their forms,
including the transportation, purchase, sale and exchange of commodities between the citizens of different
countries. 52
The judge added:
It should be noted that the view of the learned single Judge of the Bombay High Court in Indian Organic
Chemical Ltd’s case has not been approved by the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court. The Division
Bench after setting out the view of [the judge] in the aforesaid decision, ultimately disagreed with it [ … ] 53
11. 48
This position was confirmed by the Indian Supreme Court in its decision in RM Investment & Trading Company v Boeing
Company, 54  in which it held that in:
construing the expression ‘commercial’ in Section 2 of the Act it has to be borne in mind that the ‘Act
is calculated and designed to subserve the cause of facilitating international trade and promotion thereof
by providing for speedy settlement of disputes arising in such trade through arbitration and any expression
or phrase occurring [therein] should receive, consistent with its literal and grammatical sense, a liberal
construction’ [ … ] The expression ‘commercial’ should, therefore, be construed broadly having regard to the
manifold activities which are an integral part of international trade today.
11. 49
Nevertheless, the point remains that each national state may decide for itself, under the provisions of the New York
Convention, what relationships it considers to be ‘commercial’ for the purposes of the commercial reservation. 55
(v)Recognition and enforcement under the New York Convention
11. 50
The New York Convention provides for both recognition and enforcement of awards to which the Convention applies. As
far as recognition is concerned, a state bound by the Convention undertakes to respect the binding effect of awards to which
the Convention applies; accordingly, as has been seen, such awards may be relied upon by way of defence or set-off in any
legal proceedings. As far as enforcement is concerned, a state that is a party to the Convention undertakes to enforce awards
to which the Convention applies, in accordance with its local procedural rules. It also undertakes not to impose substantially
more onerous conditions, or higher fees or charges, for such enforcement than are imposed in the enforcement of its own
domestic awards. 56

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
(vi)Formalities
11. 51
The formalities required for obtaining recognition and enforcement of awards to which the New York Convention applies
are simple. 57  The party seeking such recognition and enforcement is merely required to produce to the relevant court:
 
(a)[ … ]
The duly authenticated original award or a duly certified copy thereof; [and]
 
(b)The original agreement referred to in article II, or a duly certified copy thereof. 58
11. 52
Despite these requirements of Article IV of the Convention, courts in a number of jurisdictions have enforced awards in the
absence of an original of the arbitration agreement, 59  or indeed without a written arbitration clause at all. 60
11. 53
If the award and the arbitration agreement are not in the official language of the country in which recognition and enforcement
is sought, certified translations are needed. 61  Once the necessary documents have been supplied, the court will grant
recognition and enforcement unless one or more of the grounds for refusal, listed in the Convention, are present.
(b)Refusal of recognition and enforcement
11. 54
The various grounds for refusal of recognition and enforcement of an arbitration award that are set out in the New York
Convention merit detailed discussion. This is not only because of the importance of the Convention itself, but also (and equally
crucially) because the provisions of the Model Law governing recognition and enforcement of awards (in Articles 35 and 36)
are almost identical to those set out in the Convention.
11. 55
First, and fundamentally, neither the New York Convention nor the Model Law permits any review on the merits of an award
to which the Convention applies. 62
11. 56
Secondly, the grounds for refusal of recognition and enforcement set out in the New York Convention (and in the Model Law)
are exhaustive. They are the only grounds on which recognition and enforcement may be refused.
11. 57
Thirdly, the New York Convention sets out five separate grounds on which recognition and enforcement of a Convention award
may be refused at the request of the party against whom it is invoked. 63  It is significant that, under both the Convention and the
Model Law (which follows the Convention in this respect), the burden of proof is not upon the party seeking recognition and
enforcement. 64  The remaining two grounds on which recognition and enforcement may be refused, which relate to the public
policy of the place of enforcement, are grounds that may be invoked by the enforcing court on its own motion. 65
11. 58
Fourthly, even if grounds for refusal of recognition and enforcement of an award are proved to exist, the enforcing court is
not obliged to refuse enforcement. The opening lines of Article V(1) and (2) of the Convention say that enforcement ‘may’
be refused; they do not say that it ‘must’ be refused. The language is permissive, not mandatory. 66  The same is true of the
Model Law. 67

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
11. 59
Fifthly, the intention of the New York Convention and of the Model Law is that the grounds for refusing recognition and
enforcement of arbitral awards should be applied restrictively. As a leading commentator on the Convention has stated: ‘As
far as the grounds for refusal for enforcement of the Award as enumerated in Article V are concerned, it means that they have
to be construed narrowly.’ 68
11. 60
Most national courts have recognised this. There has been long-standing approval in the United States, for example, of the
‘pro-enforcement bias’ of the Convention. 69  However, not all courts follow this internationalist approach. Practitioners of
international commercial arbitration are aware, either from their own experience or from the experience of others, of the
difficulties that may arise in some places in seeking enforcement of an award under the New York Convention. In particular, the
‘public policy’ exception 70  enables some states to play the game less fairly than others. Nor is this the only problem. 71  There
are states that have ratified the Convention, but have either not brought it into effect or have brought it into effect inadequately.
There are states in which the local courts or the local bureaucracy are unfamiliar with international arbitration—and perhaps
even suspicious of it. There are also oddities of legislation, such as those provisions of a past law in India (now repealed) stating
that where the governing law was that of India, the ensuing award was deemed to be a domestic award, even though the seat
of the arbitration was in a foreign state. 72
11. 61
Problems of this kind cannot be ignored, but they should not be exaggerated. The New York Convention has proved to be a
highly effective international instrument for the enforcement of arbitration agreements and, more importantly in the present
context, arbitration awards. 73  The Convention is now somewhat dated, 74  and it is by no means applied consistently by all of
the states that have adopted it (or which claim to have done so). 75  However, it has made the greatest single contribution to
the internationalisation of commercial arbitration. Even though the Model Law may eventually take its place, decisions under
the New York Convention will remain important, since the Model Law’s provisions governing recognition and enforcement of
arbitral awards are taken directly from that Convention.
(c)Grounds for refusal
11. 62
Under Article V(1) of the New York Convention, recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may be refused if the
opposing party proves that:
[ … ]
 
(a)The parties to the arbitration agreement [ … ] ] were, under the law applicable to them, under
some incapacity, or the said agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the country where the award
was made; or
 
(b)The party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment
of the arbitrator or of the arbitration proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his [or
her] case; or
 
(c)The award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of
the submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can
be separated from those not so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on
matters submitted to arbitration may be recognized and enforced; or

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
 
(d)The composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with
the agreement of the parties, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of
the country where the arbitration took place; or
 
(e)The award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a
competent authority of the country in which, or under the law of which, the award was made.
11. 63
Article V(2) provides:
Recognition and enforcement [ … ] may also be refused if the competent authority in the country where
recognition and enforcement is sought finds that:
 
(a) The subject matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law
of that country; or
 
(b) The recognition or enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of that
country.
These grounds for refusal of recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards are of considerable importance. They
represent an internationally accepted standard, not only because of the widespread acceptance of the New York Convention
throughout the world, but also because the Model Law adopts the same grounds (although not in precisely the same words) for
refusal of recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award, irrespective of the country in which that award was made. 76  In
addition, six of these seven grounds for refusal are also set out in the Model Law as grounds for the setting aside of an arbitral
award by the national court of the place of arbitration. 77
11. 64
In an ideal world, the provisions of the New York Convention and of the Model Law would be interpreted in the same way by
courts everywhere. Sadly, this does not happen. There are inconsistent decisions under the New York Convention, just as there
may be inconsistent decisions within a national system of law (although the latter may be corrected on appeal). Nevertheless, it
is useful to consider how national courts in different parts of the world have applied the different grounds for refusal set out in
the New York Convention. Whilst these decisions have no binding authority on national courts in other jurisdictions, they may
provide useful guidelines for the interpretation of a particular ground for refusal in a particular case.
(d)First ground for refusal—incapacity; invalid arbitration agreement
11. 65
The first ground for refusal of recognition and enforcement under the New York Convention is set out in Article V(1)(a) 78  as:
 
(a) The parties to the agreement [ … ] were, under the law applicable to them, under some
incapacity, or the said agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it
or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the country where the award was made [ … ]
The issue of capacity to enter into an arbitration agreement, which may raise particular difficulties in relation to states and state
agencies, has already been discussed in Chapter 2, as have issues as to the validity of the arbitration agreement.

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
11. 66
A classic example of a successful defence to enforcement based on invalidity of the arbitration agreement is provided by the
decision of the Administrative Tribunal of Damascus in Fougerolle SA (France) v Ministry of Defence of the Syrian Arab
Republic. 79  The Tribunal, in its decision of 31 March 1988, refused enforcement of two ICC awards, holding that they were
‘non-existent’ because they were rendered ‘without the preliminary advice on the referral of the dispute to arbitration, which
must be given by the competent Committee of the Council of State’. 80
11. 67
A later example of a successful defence to enforcement based on this ground is the decision of the UK Supreme Court in Dallah
Real Estate v Ministry of Religious Affairs. 81  In Dallah, the enforcement in London of an ICC award rendered in Paris against
the government of Pakistan was refused by the UK Supreme Court on the grounds that the government was not a party to the
arbitration agreement. The agreement containing the arbitration clause had been signed by the government-owned Awami Hajj
Trust, 82  which subsequently ceased to exist 83  and was held not to be an organ of the state. 84  In so finding, the Supreme Court
reversed the arbitral tribunal’s own finding on jurisdiction. Lord Mance emphasised that a determination by the arbitral tribunal
concerning its own jurisdiction was immaterial to the Court’s review:
The tribunal’s own view of its jurisdiction has no legal or evidential value, when the issue is whether the tribunal
had any legitimate authority in relation to the Government at all. This is so however full was the evidence before
it and however carefully deliberated was its conclusion. It is also so whatever the composition of the tribunal. 85
11. 68
The UK Supreme Court’s decision is to be contrasted with the outcome of the application for the annulment of the same award
before the Paris Court of Appeal. The Paris court, having fully agreed with the UK Supreme Court on the applicable legal
principles, found differently on the facts (it found that, as a matter of fact, the government of Pakistan was a ‘true party’ to the
underlying transaction); and so it reached the opposite conclusion on the question as to whether the government was bound
by the arbitration agreement. 86
(e)Second ground—no proper notice of appointment of arbitrator or of
the proceedings; lack of due process
11. 69
The second ground for refusal of recognition and enforcement of an award under the New York Convention is set out at Article
V(1)(b):
 
(b) The party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment
of the arbitrator or of the arbitration proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his [or
her] case [ … ]
This is perhaps the most important ground for refusal under the New York Convention (and the Model Law). It is directed at
ensuring that the arbitration itself is properly conducted, and in particular that the parties are accorded proper notice and an
adequate and fair opportunity to present their case.
11. 70
The point as to notice is a matter of formality, but it is important nonetheless. However, the main thrust of this provision of
the Convention is directed at ensuring that the requirements of ‘due process’ are observed and that the parties are given a fair
hearing. If parties from different countries are to have confidence in arbitration as a method of dispute resolution, it is essential

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
that the proceedings should be conducted in a manner that is fair and which is seen to be fair. This is something that should be
borne in mind, by parties and arbitrators alike, from the very outset of the arbitration.
11. 71
The court of the forum state will naturally have its own concept of what constitutes a ‘fair hearing’. In this sense, as was said in a
leading case in the United States, the New York Convention ‘essentially sanctions the application of the forum state’s standards
of due process’. 87  This does not mean, however, that the hearing must be conducted as if it were a hearing before a national
court in the forum state. It is generally enough if the court is satisfied that the proceedings were conducted with due regard to
any agreement between the parties, and in accordance with the principles of equality of treatment and the right of each party to
have a reasonable—rather than exhaustive—opportunity to present its case.
11. 72
The national court at the place of enforcement thus has a limited role. Its function is not to decide whether or not the award
is correct, as a matter of fact and law; its function is simply to decide whether the parties have received a fair hearing. Only a
significant and material mistake in the course of the proceedings should be sufficient to lead the court to conclude that there
was a denial of ‘due process’.
11. 73
By way of example, in a case to which reference has already been made, 88  a US corporation, which had been told that there
was no need to submit detailed invoices, had its claim rejected by the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal, for failure to submit
detailed invoices! The US court—rightly, it is suggested—refused to enforce the award against the US company. In different
circumstances, a German court held that an award that was based upon arguments that had not been raised by the parties or
the tribunal during the arbitral proceedings, and thus on which the parties had not had an opportunity to comment, violated due
process and the right to be heard. 89  In France, in Overseas Mining Investments, 90  the successful claimant had not pleaded
the grounds on which the arbitral tribunal had found in its favour. In these circumstances, the French Court of Cassation held
that the tribunal’s failure to invite both the parties to express their views on the grounds in question violated the principe de la
contradiction, which was essential for the conduct of a fair hearing. Similarly, in Kanoria and ors v Guinness, 91  the English
Court of Appeal decided that the respondent had not been afforded the chance to present its case when critical legal arguments
were made by the claimant at the hearing, which the respondent could not attend because of serious illness. In the circumstances,
the Court decided that ‘this [was] an extreme case of potential injustice’ and resolved not to enforce the arbitral award.
11. 74
Examples of unsuccessful ‘due process’ defences to enforcement are, however, more numerous. 92  In Minmetals Germany v
Ferco Steel, 93  the losing respondent in an arbitration in China opposed enforcement in England on the grounds that the award
was founded on evidence that the arbitral tribunal had obtained through its own investigations. An English court rejected this
defence, on the basis that the respondent was given an opportunity to ask for the disclosure of evidence at issue and to comment
on it, but had declined to do so. The court held that the due process defence to enforcement was not intended to accommodate
circumstances in which a party had failed to take advantage of an opportunity duly accorded to it. 94
11. 75
A further example of an unsuccessful attempt to rely on this ground is Gold Reserve Inc v Venezuela. 95  Following an adverse
award against it, Venezuela sought to resist enforcement in the United States by arguing that it had been ‘unable to present its
case’ because Gold Reserve had been allocated more time at the hearing to undertake witness examination. The US District
Court for the District of Colombia, having examined the facts, found there to be a good reason for the tribunal’s decision
to allocate Gold Reserve more time than Venezuela at the hearing: Venezuela itself had requested a condensed hearing and,
unlike Gold Reserve, had stated that it did ‘not intend to call any of [the opposing party’s] witnesses’ for cross examination. In
dismissing Venezuela’s application to resist enforcement, the US District Court emphasised that it was insufficient for Venezuela
to show merely that the parties were not afforded equal hearing time. Rather, Venezuela must establish ‘exactly what it needed
more time for, and how the denial of extra time prevented it from presenting its case’, which Venezuela failed to do so in the
circumstances. 96
11. 76

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
In recent years, the concern to minimise a ‘due process’ complaint at the annulment or enforcement stage has led some
participants in arbitrations (parties and arbitrators alike) to display symptoms of ‘due process paranoia’. 97  This can sometimes
lead parties or arbitrators to be overly accommodating to procedural objections, procedural obstructions, or dilatory tactics in
order to safeguard the enforceability of the award—and thereby, in the process, undermining the equally important procedural
expectation of an efficient process. 98  But a right to due process is a right to an adequate and equal opportunity to present a
case, not a right to an excessive or unlimited opportunity (which is perhaps better thought of as ‘undue process’). In truth, the
description of this concern as a ‘paranoia’ is apt because it is rarely justified by the actual risk of a successful due process
defence to enforcement. 99
11. 77
In reality, objections to enforcement are rarely successful on due process grounds. Indeed, in many jurisdictions, the courts have
begun to recognise the negative effect of ‘due process paranoia’, and have emphasised that arbitrators should not be reluctant to
make robust case management decisions. By way of example, in dismissing a due process challenge, the Malaysian High Court
observed that ‘[n]atural justice does not demand that a party is entitled to receive responses to all submissions and arguments
presented for only the right to be heard is fundamental’. 100  Similarly, the Singapore Court of Appeal recently observed that
the concept of ‘due process’ does not require tribunals to sacrifice efficiency in order to accommodate unreasonable procedural
demands by a party. In sentiments that might be expected from many courts around the world, Singapore’s Court of Appeal held
that reviewing courts should accord a margin of deference to tribunals in matters of procedure and will not intervene simply
because it might have done things differently. 101
(f)Third ground—jurisdictional issues
11. 78
The third ground for refusal of recognition and enforcement of an award under the New York Convention is set out at Article
V(1)(c):
 
(c) The award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of
the submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration, provided that, if the decision on matters submitted to arbitration can
be separated from those not so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on
matters submitted to arbitration may be recognised and enforced [ … ]
It is not uncommon for the issue of jurisdiction to be raised as the first line of defence to the enforcement of an arbitral award.
The issue may be raised as part of a plea that there was no valid agreement to arbitrate, 102  in which case it would fall under
Article V(1)(a) of the New York Convention, or it may be raised under the present heading. Jurisdictional issues as a ground
for challenging an award have already been discussed, 103  and it has been noted that the right to raise such an issue may have
been lost because of failure to do so at the appropriate time. 104
11. 79
The first part of this ground for refusal of enforcement under the Convention (and under the Model Law) envisages a situation
in which the arbitral tribunal is alleged to have exceeded its jurisdiction by going ‘beyond what was sought’ (that is, ultra
petita) and dealing with a dispute that was not submitted to it. According to a leading authority on the Convention, courts
almost invariably reject this defence. 105  A robust rejection of such a defence comes from the US Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia, in a case in which it was pleaded that the arbitral tribunal had awarded a considerable sum of damages
for consequential loss when the contract between the parties clearly excluded this head of damage. 106  The Court stated that,
without undertaking an in-depth review of the law of contract, it could not state whether a breach of contract would abrogate a
clause that excluded consequential damages. However, ‘the standard of review of an arbitration award by an American Court is
extremely narrow’, 107  and (adopting the words of the US Court of Appeals in the well-known case of Parsons Whittemore 108 )

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
the Convention did not sanction ‘second-guessing the arbitrators’ construction of the parties’ agreement’, nor would it be proper
for the court to ‘usurp the arbitrators’ role’. 109  Accordingly, enforcement was granted.
11. 80
A further example of an unsuccessful attempt to use this ground to resist enforcement is a decision by the US District Court for
the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division. 110  The respondents argued that the arbitral tribunal had exceeded its authority
by giving a preclusive effect to findings of an English court, rather than holding an evidentiary hearing to make its own findings.
The US court held that since the parties’ arbitration agreement neither stipulated any specific hearing procedure to be followed
nor prohibited the tribunal from deciding on issues of preclusion, these were issues to be decided by the arbitral tribunal. 111
11. 81
The second part of this ground for refusal is concerned with the situation in which it is alleged that the tribunal exceeded its
jurisdiction in some respects, but not in others. In such a situation, even if the partial excess of authority is proved, that part
of the award which concerns matters properly submitted to arbitration may be saved and enforcement ordered. For example, in
a case that came before the Italian courts, the court examined the award to determine whether or not the arbitral tribunal had
exceeded the limits of its jurisdiction. 112  Having done so, the Italian court granted partial enforcement of the award, to the
extent that it dealt with matters within the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal.
(g)Fourth ground—composition of tribunal or procedure not in
accordance with arbitration agreement or the relevant law
11. 82
The fourth ground for refusal of recognition and enforcement of an award under the New York Convention is set out at Article
V(1)(d):
 
(d) The composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with
the agreement of the parties, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of
the country where the arbitration took place [ … ]
The 1927 Geneva Convention provided that enforcement of an award could be refused if the composition of the arbitral tribunal,
or the arbitral procedure, was not in accordance both with the agreement of the parties and the law of the place of arbitration.
This double requirement meant that if an arbitration was not held in strict accordance with the procedural law of the place of
arbitration, the consequent award would not be enforced. Under the New York Convention, the double requirement has been
dropped and compliance with the agreement of the parties has become the main area of enquiry.
11. 83
In a case that came before the Supreme Court of Hong Kong in 1994, it was argued that enforcement of an award made in
China should be refused because the composition of the arbitral tribunal was not in accordance with the agreement of the
parties. 113  The arbitrators who had been appointed were on the Shenzhen list of arbitrators, but not (as specified in the arbitration
agreement) on the Beijing list.
11. 84
Giving judgment, Kaplan J said:
It is clear therefore that the only grounds upon which enforcement can be refused are those specified [ … ] and
that the burden of proving a ground is upon the defendant. Further, it is clear that even though a ground has been
proved, the Court retains a residual discretion. 114

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
After considering the facts, the judge said:
I conclude therefore, somewhat reluctantly, that technically the arbitrators did not have jurisdiction to decide this
dispute and that in all the circumstances of this case, the ground specified in the section has been made out. I say
technically because the parties did agree to have a CIETAC Arbitration and that is what they got, even though
it was held at a place within China not specified in the contract and by arbitrators who apparently were not on
the Beijing list. 115
11. 85
Although the ground for refusal of enforcement had been made out, the judge allowed enforcement of the award to go ahead
nevertheless on the basis that the party objecting to enforcement had taken part in the arbitration knowing that, technically, the
arbitrators were not selected from the correct list. Having done so, it could not now seek to profit from this departure. The judge
considered the application of the doctrine of estoppel to other aspects of the New York Convention and said:
If the doctrine of estoppel can apply to arguments over the written form of the arbitration agreement under Article
II(2), then I fail to see why it cannot also apply to the grounds of opposition set out in Article V. It strikes me as
quite unfair for a party to appreciate that there might be something wrong with the composition of the tribunal
yet not make any formal submission whatsoever to the tribunal about its own jurisdiction, or to the arbitration
commission which constituted the tribunal and then to proceed to fight the case on the merits and then two years
after the award, attempt to nullify the whole proceedings on the grounds that the arbitrators were chosen from
the wrong CIETAC list. 116
He continued:
[E]ven if a ground of opposition is proved, there is still a residual discretion left in the enforcing court to enforce
nonetheless. This shows that the grounds of opposition are not to be inflexibly applied. The residual discretion
enables the enforcing court to achieve a just result in all the circumstances [ … ] 117
11. 86
Similar problems can arise where the arbitral institution prescribed in the arbitration agreement has subsequently undergone
structural changes. In a case before the Indian court in 2018, 118  the arbitration agreement provided for ‘arbitration before [ … ]
China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission (CIETAC) in Shanghai’. When the contract was signed in
2011, CIETAC had two sub-commissions: the Shanghai Sub-Commission and the Shenzhen/South China Sub-Commission. In
2013, however, the two sub-commissions declared independence: The Shanghai Sub-Commission then became the Shanghai
International Arbitration Centre (SHIAC), and the Shenzhen/South China sub-commission became the Shenzhen Court of
International Arbitration (SCIA). In 2015, following an unsuccessful challenge of a CIETAC award rendered in China, the losing
party in the arbitration sought to resist enforcement of the award in India by arguing that the parties had agreed to refer their
disputes to the then Shanghai sub-commission (which became SHIAC) and therefore CIETAC had no jurisdiction to hear the
dispute at issue. The Delhi High Court rejected this argument, on the basis that the Shanghai sub-commission was not expressly
mentioned in the arbitration agreement and that, under the CIETAC Rules effective at the time the arbitration agreement was
concluded, in the absence of an agreement between the parties as to which of CIETAC or its sub-commissions would administer
the dispute, the final decision was to be made by CIETAC itself.
11. 87
In contrast, Encyclopaedia Universalis SA (Luxembourg) v Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc. (US) 119  is an example of the
successful reliance on this ground before the US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. In their contract, the parties had
agreed that (a) the two party-appointed arbitrators must attempt to choose a third arbitrator, and (b), upon the failure of the two
party-appointed arbitrators to agree on a third, the English Commercial Court would appoint one. The appellant, Encyclopaedia
Universalis SA (Luxembourg), sidestepped the first requirement and the Commercial Court nevertheless proceeded to appoint
a third arbitrator. In response to a request by Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc. (US) to refuse enforcement of the award rendered
against it, the US Court held that:

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
[T]he [English court]’s premature appointment of [the third arbitrator] irremediably spoiled the arbitration process
[ … ] the issue of how the third arbitrator was to be appointed is more than a trivial matter of form. Article V(1)
(d) of the New York Convention itself suggests the importance of arbitral composition […] 120
11. 88
As described in Chapter 6, it is increasingly common for institutional rules to provide for expedited or emergency arbitration
procedure. Parties taking advantage of such procedures, however, may sometimes face difficulty in the enforcement stage. In
Noble Resources International Pte. Ltd v Shanghai Good Credit International Trade Co., Ltd., 121  the arbitration agreement
provided for a three-member SIAC tribunal. Nobel Resources applied for expedited procedure under the 2013 SIAC Rules and,
despite Shanghai Good Credit’s objection, the SIAC Court decided to appoint a sole arbitrator to hear the dispute pursuant
to the expedited procedure. After the sole arbitrator rendered an award in favour of Nobel Resources, Shanghai Good Credit
successfully resisted enforcement of the award in China, on the basis that the appointment of a sole arbitrator was contrary to
the parties’ agreement for a three-member tribunal, and that the SIAC Court erred in compelling the parties to accept a sole
arbitrator in the circumstances.
11. 89
Following the Chinese court’s decision, SIAC has amended its latest rules (the 2016 SIAC Rules) to prevent the same conflict
from arising. Article 5.3 of the 2016 SIAC Rules now provides more explicitly that: ‘[B]y agreeing to arbitration under these
Rules, the parties agree that, where arbitral proceedings are conducted in accordance with the Expedited Procedure under this
Rule 5, the rules and procedures set forth in Rule 5.2 shall apply even in cases where the arbitration agreement contains contrary
terms’.
(h)Fifth ground—award suspended, or set aside
11. 90
The fifth ground for refusal of recognition and enforcement under the New York Convention is set out at Article V(1)(e):
 
(e) The award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a
competent authority of the country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made
[ … ]
This fifth ground for refusal of recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award (which, like the others, also appears in the
Model Law) has given rise to more controversy than any of the previous grounds. First, there is the reference to an award being
‘not binding’. In the 1927 Geneva Convention, the word ‘final’ was used. This was taken by many to mean that the award had
to be declared as ‘final’ by the court of the place of arbitration and this gave rise to the problem of the double exequatur. It
was intended that the word ‘binding’ would avoid this problem, particularly since many international and institutional rules
of arbitration state in terms that the award of the arbitral tribunal is to be accepted by the parties as final and ‘binding’ upon
them. 122  However, some national courts still consider it necessary to investigate the law applicable to the award to see if it is
‘binding’ under that law 123 —although the better position appears to be that an award is ‘binding’ if it is no longer open to an
appeal on the merits, either internally (that is, within the relevant rules of arbitration) or by an application to the court. 124
11. 91
There are other problems too, with this fifth ground for refusal, which have led to considerable controversy. At first sight, the
proposition that an award may be refused recognition and enforcement if it has been set aside or suspended by a court at the
place (or seat) of the arbitration seems reasonable enough. If, for example, an award has been set aside in Switzerland, it will
be unenforceable in that country—and it might be expected that, if only as a matter of international comity, the courts of other
states would also regard the award as unenforceable.

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
11. 92
This is not necessarily so, however. Courts in other countries may take the view (and indeed, as will be described, 125  in some
countries they have taken the view) that they will enforce an arbitral award even if it has been set aside by the courts of the seat
of the arbitration. This leads to a situation in which an award that has been set aside and so is unenforceable in its country of
origin may be refused enforcement under the New York Convention in one country, but granted enforcement in another.
11. 93
The problem arises because the New York Convention does not in any way restrict the grounds on which an award may be set
aside or suspended by the court of the country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made. 126  This is a matter
that is left to the domestic law of the country concerned, and this domestic law may impose local requirements (such as the
need to initial each page of the award) that judges and lawyers elsewhere would not regard as sufficient to impeach the validity
of an international arbitral award.
11. 94
The allowance for local requirements that is made in the New York Convention has been described by a former secretary-
general of the ICC Court as:
a hitherto rock-solid rampart against the true internationalisation of arbitration, because in the award’s country
of origin all means of recourse and all grounds of nullity applicable to purely domestic awards may be used to
oppose recognition abroad [ … ] 127
Another experienced commentator has referred to the ‘anathema of local particularities’, which are capable of leading to the
setting aside of international awards, and has suggested that ‘such local standard annulments’ should be given only local effect
and should be disregarded internationally. 128
11. 95
The argument in favour of the fifth ground is a familiar one. It is the classic argument that the courts of the place of arbitration
should have some control over arbitral proceedings conducted on their territory, if only to guard against lack of due process,
fraud, corruption, or other improper conduct on the part of the arbitral tribunal. Perhaps the real argument is: how far should
this control go? Should it be limited to the first four grounds of the New York Convention, 129  or should it go further? And if
so, how much further? The problem is to strike the correct balance between regulation and laissez-faire.
11. 96
Whilst the argument continues, courts in France, Belgium, Austria, the United Kingdom, and the United States have shown
themselves prepared on occasion to recognise and enforce arbitral awards even though they have been set aside by the courts
at the seat of arbitration. 130  The justification for this is twofold. First, the language of Article V of the New York Convention
(as already discussed) is permissive, not mandatory. Specifically, the English language version of the Convention says that the
enforcing court may refuse recognition and enforcement—not that it must do so. Secondly, the New York Convention recognises
that there may be more favourable provisions under which an award may be recognised and enforced. The Convention contains
the following provision, in Article VII(1):
The provisions of the present Convention shall not affect the validity of multilateral or bilateral agreements
concerning the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards entered into by the Contracting States nor deprive
any interested party of any right he may have to avail himself of the arbitral award in the manner and to the extent
allowed by the law or the treaties of the country where such award is sought to be relied upon.
In this way, the New York Convention recognises explicitly that, in any given country, there may be a local law that, whether
by treaty or otherwise, is more favourable to the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards than the Convention itself. The
Convention gives its blessing, so to speak, to any party who wishes to take advantage of this more favourable local law.
11. 97
The New York Convention has long been regarded as being of fundamental importance to the recognition and enforcement of
international arbitral awards. It remains so. However, the possibility of obtaining recognition and enforcement of an award that

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
has been set aside by means of applying a more favourable local law, which does not reflect or rely upon the Convention, should
not be overlooked. This approach can be illustrated with some famous examples emanating from the French and US courts.
In the French decision of Hilmarton, 131  an award rendered by a tribunal in Switzerland in favour of the respondent was later
annulled by the Geneva Court of Appeal. In the meantime, however, the respondent had applied to the French courts to enforce
the award and was successful at the first instance. On appeal from the enforcement proceedings in France, the French Court of
Appeal had to decide whether to uphold the lower court’s decision to enforce the award, even though it had been set aside in
the country in which it was made. The Court of Appeal decided to let the enforcement proceed. This decision was subsequently
confirmed by the French Court of Cassation, which stated that:
the award rendered in Switzerland is an international award which is not integrated in the legal system of that
State, so that it remains in existence even if set aside and its recognition in France is not contrary to international
public policy. 132
11. 98
In Chromalloy, 133  the US Federal Court for the District of Columbia enforced an award that had been set aside in Egypt. 134
The Court explicitly contrasted the permissive nature of Article V of the Convention with the mandatory nature of Article VII:
While Article V provides a discretionary standard, Article VII of the Convention requires that, ‘The
provisions of the present Convention shall not [ … ] deprive any interested party of any right he may have
to avail himself of an arbitral award in the manner and to the extent allowed by the law [ … ] of the country
where such award is sought to be relied on.’
11. 99
In Putrabali, 136  the French courts enforced an award set aside in England. In so doing, the Court of Cassation held that:
[A]n international arbitral award, which does not belong to any state legal system, is an international decision of
justice and its validity must be examined according to the applicable rules of the country where its recognition
and enforcement are sought. 137
More recently, in a decision of the US District Court for the Southern District of New York in COMMISA v Pemex, 138  a
Mexican award was enforced under the 1975 Inter-American Convention on International Commercial Arbitration (the Panama
Convention), 139  despite being set aside at the seat. A Mexican court had applied a statute that was not yet in existence at the
time the parties entered into the contract, and had set aside the award on the basis that, as a matter of Mexican law, arbitral
tribunals lacked the competency to hear and decide cases brought against the Mexican state, or an organ of the state (such as
Pemex, Mexico’s state-owned oil company). In rejecting the Mexican court’s ruling and confirming the award, the US court
was careful to explain that it was ‘neither deciding, nor reviewing, Mexican law’; rather, its decision was made on the basis
that the Mexican court’s ruling ‘violated basic notions of justice in that it applied a law that was not in existence at the time the
parties’ contract was formed and left COMMISA without an apparent ability to litigate its claims’. 140
11. 100
Notwithstanding decisions such as Hilmarton, Chromalloy, Putrabali, and Pemex, the enforcement of awards that have been
set aside by the courts of the place of arbitration remains controversial. With some notable exceptions, courts around the world
are more likely than not to decline to enforce annulled awards. 141
11. 101
Moreover, it should be noted that the only national court that is competent to suspend or set aside an award is the court of the
country ‘in which, or under the law of which, that award was made’. 142  This court will almost invariably be the national court
of the seat of the arbitration. The impracticability of holding an arbitration in country X, but subjecting it to the procedural
law of country Y, has already been discussed, 143  and so the prospect of an award being set aside under the procedural law
of a state other than that of the seat of arbitration is unlikely. However, an ingenious (but unsuccessful) attempt was made to
persuade the US District Court to set aside an award made in Mexico, on the basis that the reference to the law under which

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
that award was made was a reference to the law governing the dispute and not to the procedural law. 144  The US court firmly
rejected this argument, stating:
Decisions of foreign courts under the Convention uniformly support the view that the clause in question means
procedural and not substantive (that is, in most cases, contract law) [ … ]
Accordingly, we hold that the contested language in Article V(1)(e) of the Convention [ … ] refers exclusively
to procedural and not substantive law, and more precisely to the regimen or scheme of arbitral procedural law
under which the arbitration was conducted. 145
The court went on to hold that since the seat of the arbitration was Mexico, only the Mexican court had jurisdiction to set aside
the award. 146
11. 102
Courts are not always immune to such creative attempts to resist enforcement. The Indian Supreme Court, 147  for example,
has in the past accepted that an award rendered in London that was the object of enforcement proceedings in the United States
could be set aside in India simply because the parties had chosen Indian law to govern the substance of their dispute. 148  This
decision was plainly wrong and the Indian Supreme Court subsequently recognised this. In its decision in Bharat Aluminium
Co. v Kaiser Aluminum Technical Service, Inc., 149  the Supreme Court affirmed that Indian courts do not have jurisdiction, in
either a supportive or supervisory role, where the seat of the arbitration is outside India.
11. 103
Finally, as described in Chapter 6, it is increasingly common for institutional rules now to provide for emergency arbitration
procedures, 150  in addition to endowing arbitral tribunals with the now long-standing power to grant interim measures. The
finality for the purposes of enforcement of the awards that result from such emergency procedures, as well as measures that result
from applications for interim relief, lead to vastly different decisions across jurisdictions. For example, courts in Australia, 151
Chile, 152  and Russia 153  have considered interim awards generally unenforceable, on the basis that such awards are not yet
‘final’ or ‘binding’ on the parties, although it is unclear whether the same approach is extended to emergency awards. In contrast,
some courts in the US have held both interim awards and emergency awards to be enforceable provided that the ruling in those
awards definitively disposes of a self-contained issue, even if the awards do not themselves resolve part of the dispute. 154  The
Supreme Court of India has taken a similar approach. 155  In Hong Kong and Singapore, this question is now settled by national
legislation, which expressly provides that both interim and emergency awards are enforceable. 156
11. 104
Given the lack of international consensus on this issue, those invoking an emergency procedure or applying for interim relief
should consider closely the particular approach of the likely courts of enforcement before setting off an errand that may not
result in an enforceable emergency or interim decision.
11. 105
This completes this review of the five grounds for refusal of recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award that are laid down
in both the New York Convention and the Model Law, and which it is for the party resisting enforcement to prove. As already
mentioned, there are two further grounds that may be invoked by the enforcement court itself. These concern first, arbitrability
and secondly, public policy.
(i)Arbitrability
11. 106
The New York Convention provides, as does the Model Law, that recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may be
refused:

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
if the competent authority in the country where recognition and enforcement is sought finds that:
 
(a) The subject matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law
of that country [ … ]
11. 107
Arbitrability has already been discussed in Chapter 2. As indicated, each state has its own concept of what disputes should be
reserved for the courts of law and what disputes that state will allow to be resolved by arbitration. This question may arise both
at the beginning of an arbitration (‘is this dispute capable of being referred to arbitration?’) and at the end (‘would this dispute
have been capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of the enforcement state?’). When the issue of ‘arbitrability’ arises
as a defence to enforcement under the New York Convention, it becomes an issue for the law of the enforcement state and,
being governed principally by considerations of public policy, the decision varies from state to state.
11. 108
For example, Russian courts used to interpret provisions of the Russian Commercial Procedure Code stipulating the exclusive
jurisdiction of certain Russian courts over corporate governance disputes as precluding the arbitrability of such disputes. In
Maximov v Novolipetsky Metallurgicheskiy Kombinat, 158  following the entry into an agreement to purchase shares in a Russian-
incorporated company, a dispute arose between the seller and buyer over the purchase price. The seller, who alleged that he had
not received the price required under the agreement, obtained an arbitral award at the Moscow-based International Commercial
Arbitration Court (ICAC). The Supreme Commercial Arbitrazh Court, upholding the decision of a lower court to set aside the
award, held that corporate governance disputes are non-arbitrable under Article 225(1) of the Arbitration Procedural Code.
However, following a reform of the Russian arbitration law which came into effect in 2017, corporate disputes are now generally
arbitrable as a matter of Russian law, subject only to some limited conditions. 159
11. 109
In another example, the Supreme Court of Singapore ruled that whether a person is the alter ego of a company is an issue that
does not have a public interest element, so is within the scope of submission to arbitration and is therefore arbitrable. 160  The
defendant had argued that the arbitrator could not hold that he was bound by the arbitration clause based on a finding of an
alter ego, since the issue of an alter ego was not arbitrable under Arizona law (the governing law of the contract). The Court
dismissed this argument, holding that the law of Arizona was irrelevant, since the issue of arbitrability in a Singapore court as
a ground for refusing enforcement was to be determined under the law of Singapore. 161
(j)Public policy
11. 110
Recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if it is contrary to the public policy of the enforcement
state. 162  It is understandable that a state may wish to have the right to refuse to recognise and enforce an arbitration award that
offends its own notions of public policy, and in some jurisdictions an enforcing court is required to examine the possibility of
a public policy violation ex officio. 163  Yet when reference is made to ‘public policy’, it is difficult not to recall the sceptical
comment of the English judge who said, almost two centuries ago: ‘It is never argued at all but where other points fail.’ 164
11. 111
Certainly, courts in England are reluctant to excuse an award from enforcement on grounds of public policy. At one time, it was
said that ‘there is no case in which this exception has been applied by an English court’. 165  Inevitably, of course, the exception
then arose and was applied in Soleimany v Soleimany. 166  In this case, an English court refused to enforce an award giving effect
to a contract between a father and son that involved the illegal smuggling of carpets out of Iran, in breach of Iranian revenue
laws and export controls. The father and son had agreed to submit their dispute to arbitration by the Beth Din, the Court of the

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
Chief Rabbi in London, which applied Jewish law. As a matter of the applicable Jewish law, the illegal purpose of the contract
had no effect on the rights of the parties and the Beth Din proceeded to make an award enforcing the contract. In declining to
enforce the award, the English court held that:
The Court is in our view concerned to preserve the integrity of its process, and to see that it is not abused. The
parties cannot override that concern by private agreement. They cannot by procuring an arbitration conceal that
they, or rather one of them, is seeking to enforce an illegal contract. Public policy will not allow it. 167
11. 112
Apart from rare exceptions such as this, most countries observe the ‘pro-enforcement bias’ of the New York Convention. 168
Indeed, this pro-enforcement bias may itself be considered a matter of public policy, as the English courts confirmed in Westacre
Investments Inc. v Jugoimport-SPDR Holding Co. Ltd. 169  This dispute arose from a consultancy agreement for the procurement
of contracts for the sale of military equipment in Kuwait. Westacre commenced arbitration, claiming payment of its consulting
fee. Jugoimport defended the claim on the grounds that, in violation of Kuwaiti law and public policy, the contract involved
Westacre bribing various Kuwaitis to exert their influence in favour of entering sales contracts with Jugoimport. The agreement
between Westacre and Jugoimport was governed by Swiss law, and provided for arbitration in Switzerland. The arbitral tribunal
found that there was no evidence of corruption and that lobbying by private enterprises to obtain public contracts was not illegal
under Swiss law. The award was first challenged in the Swiss Federal Court, which rejected the challenge on the basis that
allegations of corruption had already been dealt with and rejected by the arbitral tribunal. Attempts to enforce the award were
subsequently challenged in the English courts, where Jugoimport filed new affidavit evidence in support of its allegation of
corruption.
11. 113
In decisions that attracted some critical commentary, 170  the English courts rejected the challenge to enforcement, both at first
instance and in the Court of Appeal, on the grounds that: the arbitral tribunal itself had considered the allegations of bribery and
found that they had not been substantiated; ‘lobbying’ was not, as such, an illegal activity under the governing law chosen by
the parties; and the Court was faced with international arbitration awards that had been upheld by the Swiss Federal Tribunal,
and therefore had to balance the public policy of discouraging international commercial corruption against the public policy
of sustaining international arbitration awards.
11. 114
It is clear that the ‘public policy’ referred to in the New York Convention is the public policy of the enforcement state. 171  The
real question is whether that public policy differentiates between foreign arbitral awards and purely domestic awards.
11. 115
The approach of the US courts was summarised by the Federal District Court of Massachusetts in Sonatrach. 172  The court
stated that:
The line of decisions which conclusively tip the judicial scale in favour of arbitration [are] a line of United States
Supreme Court opinions which enthusiastically endorse an internationalist approach towards commercial disputes
involving foreign entities. These decisions, The Bremen v Zapata Offshore Co 173  (forum selection clauses in
international commercial contract enforced); Scherk v Alberto-Culver Co 174  (international arbitration clause
held enforceable when in conflict with federal securities laws); and most recently Mitsubishi 175  (international
arbitration clause held enforceable when in conflict with Federal Antitrust laws) eschew the parochial tendencies
of domestic tribunals in retaining jurisdiction over international commercial disputes. The Supreme Court
powerfully advocates the need for international comity in an increasingly interdependent world. Such respect
is especially important, in this Court’s view, when parties mutually agree to be bound by freely negotiated
contracts. 176
11. 116
A similar line of reasoning is found in the decision of the New York District Court in the well-known case of Parsons Whittemore
Overseas Co. Inc. v Société Générale de l’Industrie du Papier (RAKTA). 177  The court was confronted by an argument that
recognition and enforcement of an award should be refused on the grounds that diplomatic relations between Egypt (the

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
18
respondent’s state) and the United States had been severed. The court rejected this argument and referred to the ‘general pro-
enforcement bias’ of the New York Convention. 178  It held that the Convention’s ‘public policy’ defence should be construed
narrowly, and that enforcement of foreign arbitral awards should be denied on this basis only ‘where enforcement would violate
the forum state’s most basic notions of morality and justice’. 179
11. 117
Courts in other countries have also recognised that, in applying their own public policy to Convention awards, they should
give it an international, and not a domestic, dimension. The English Court of Appeal in RBRG Trading (UK) Ltd v Sinocore
International Co. Ltd, 180  having considered the decisions in both Soleimany and Westacre discussed above, concluded that
‘where, on the facts, there is no illegality under the governing law but there is under English law, public policy will only be
engaged where the illegality reflects considerations of international public policy rather than purely English domestic public
policy’. 181
11. 118
Similarly, in India, in a case to which reference has already been made, 182  the Supreme Court said:
This raises the question of whether the narrower concept of public policy as applicable in the field of public
international law should be applied or the wider concept of public policy as applicable in the field of municipal
law. The Court held that the narrower view should prevail and that enforcement would be refused on the public
policy ground if such enforcement would be contrary to (i) fundamental policy of Indian law; or (ii) the interests
of India; or (iii) justice or morality. 183
11. 119
French, 184  Swiss, 185  German, 186  and Egyptian 187  courts have made decisions to similar effect. In addition, the arbitration
legislation in some countries makes an express distinction between domestic and international public policy, limiting the refusal
of enforcement to the latter ground only. 188
11. 120
These decisions and legislation, from different parts of the world, show a readiness to limit (sometimes severely) the public
policy defence to enforcement. However, the boundaries of national public policy are not fixed, and some national courts have
historically taken a broader view of the defence than modern international standards would countenance. 189
11. 121
Rather than refer to ‘public policy’, Chinese law refers to the ‘social and public interest’, which is potentially an even more
oblique concept. Chinese courts have recognised an obligation to consider, in every case, whether this ‘social and public interest’
is violated, even if neither party has raised it. 190  The Supreme People’s Court has issued a statement of how to interpret this
‘social and public interest’ ground, asking:
[U]nder what circumstances does the principle of public interest apply? The principle of public interest can apply
where there are breaches of fundamental principles of Chinese law, national sovereignty or national security, or
breaches of the principles of social ethics and fundamental moral value. 191
11. 122
Commentators have summarised this position as meaning that in China ‘public policy’ is broader than ‘public morals’, and
includes ‘traditional and societal sentiment’. 192
11. 123
Such broad conceptions of public policy may explain decisions such as that in Heavy Metal. 193  In that case, the Supreme
People’s Court had to decide whether to enforce a foreign-related arbitral award, which directed the respondent to pay
compensatory damages to a US heavy metal band, whose performances had been banned by the Chinese Ministry of Culture
on the grounds that the artists performed ‘outrageous acts’ such as drinking, smoking, splashing water, lying on the stage floor
while performing, and jumping down from the stage. A CIETAC tribunal awarded damages for the band’s lost income. When

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
19
the band sought enforcement, the Supreme People’s Court denied enforcement, on the grounds that the tribunal’s findings were
in manifest disregard of the underlying facts that the performance of heavy metal music was against ‘national sentiments’, and
accordingly contrary to the social and public interests. 194  Whatever one may think of heavy metal music, it is difficult not to
reach the conclusion that this amounted to a troublingly broad interpretation of the public policy exception to the enforcement
of arbitral awards.
11. 124
The requirement that lower courts must obtain leave of the Supreme People’s Court to refuse recognition or enforcement has
helped to reduce the incidence of overly broad interpretations of public policy to deny enforcement of awards in China. 195
According to a speech in 2008 by Deputy Chief Justice Wan E’xiang, of the Supreme People’s Court, between 2000 and 2008
the Court did not uphold a single decision by the Chinese lower courts that refused to enforce a foreign arbitral award on public
policy grounds. 196  Attempts by parties to equate the social and public interest, for example, with a simple violation of Chinese
law, or (more worryingly) the interests of state-owned enterprises, have been rejected as falling short of a breach of public
policy. 197
11. 125
Russian courts are likewise known for expansive interpretations of the notion of public policy and have declined, for instance,
to enforce foreign arbitral awards if the amount of damages awarded was ‘punitive’ or ‘disproportionate to the breach’ in the
eyes of Russian courts. 198
11. 126
In an attempt at harmonisation, the Committee on International Commercial Arbitration of the International Law Association
(ILA) has sought to offer definitions of the concepts of ‘public policy’, ‘international public policy’, and ‘transnational public
policy’, and recommends that ‘[t]he finality of awards rendered in the context of international commercial arbitration should
be respected save in exceptional circumstances’, such exceptional circumstances being the violation of international public
policy. 199  The Committee defined ‘international public policy’ as that ‘part of the public policy of a state which, if violated,
would prevent a party from invoking a foreign law or foreign judgment or foreign award’. 200
11. 127
The application of competition law raises particular issues of public policy that may become relevant in both annulment and
enforcement proceedings. In Eco Swiss China Time Ltd v Benetton International NV, 201  the European Court of Justice (ECJ)
held that Article 81 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community, or EC Treaty (now Article 101 of the Treaty on
the Functioning of the European Union, or TFEU) constituted a matter of public policy within the meaning of the New York
Convention and, on this basis, ruled that:
[A] national court, to which application is made for annulment of an arbitration award must grant that application
if it considers that the award in question is in fact contrary to Article 81 EC (ex Article 85), where its domestic
rules of procedure require it to grant an application for annulment founded on failure to observe national rules
of public policy. 202
11. 128
The French courts (including the French Court of Cassation) have taken a narrow approach to the impact of EU competition
law on the enforceability of awards, setting aside awards on EU competition law grounds only if they show a ‘flagrant, specific
and concrete breach’ of French international public policy. 203  The Swiss Federal Court has taken an even more restrictive
approach. In its decision of 8 March 2006, it held that EU competition law could not be considered as part of the foundation of
all legal orders so as to qualify as a matter of public policy and, on that ground, simply dismissed the case. 204  For their part,
and in contrast, the Dutch and Belgian courts have shown themselves ready to undertake a substantive review of awards from
the perspective of competition law and have not refrained from annulling awards found to be in breach of EU competition law
(and in particular Article 81 EC). 205
11. 129

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
20
In the United States too, the interplay between public policy and the enforcement of anti-trust arbitral awards has proved
significant. The general approach was set by the US Supreme Court in the case of Mitsubishi v Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, 206
in which it confirmed the arbitrability of antitrust claims, but emphasised that US national courts would have the opportunity
to have a ‘second look’ at such arbitral awards at the enforcement stage, in order to ensure that the legitimate interest in the
enforcement of anti-trust laws had been addressed by the arbitral tribunal. In practice, however, US appellate courts have
demonstrated different views with respect to their power to review an arbitral award au fond. For instance, in 2003, a divided
Court of Appeal for the Seventh Circuit, considering the enforcement of a domestic award, quoted Mitsubishi, stating that a
court should confirm only that the arbitral tribunal ‘took cognizance of the antitrust claims and actually decided on them’; no
further review of the merits had to be carried out. 207  However, one year later, the US Court of Appeal for the Fifth Circuit did
not refrain from a substantive review of the merits of a domestic antitrust arbitral award. 208
(k)Other grounds
11. 130
Although the grounds for refusal of enforcement listed in Article V of the New York Convention are exhaustive, some courts
have refused enforcement on grounds derived from other articles of the Convention. Thus, in the US case Monegasque de
Reassurance SAM (Monde Re) v NAK Naftogart of Ukraine and State of Ukraine, 209  the Second Circuit refused enforcement
of a Moscow award on grounds of forum non conveniens—a judicial procedural discretion that exists in the common law world,
but is unknown in the civil law world. In so doing, it rejected the contention that Article V sets forth the only grounds for
refusing to enforce a foreign arbitral award, and held that Article III made the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards subject to
the rules of procedure of the courts where enforcement is sought, which, so it held, included the rule of forum non conveniens.
11. 131
More recently, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in Figueiredo Ferraz E Engenharia de Projeto Ltda v Republic of
Peru 210  reversed, on grounds of forum non conveniens, a lower court’s confirmation of a Peruvian arbitral award. Figueiredo
had obtained an award against the Peruvian government, which the latter began paying out gradually, in accordance with a
subsequently enacted Peruvian statute that limits the amount of money that an agency of the Peruvian government may pay
annually to satisfy a judgment to 3 per cent of the agency’s annual budget. The Second Circuit held that Peru was a more
appropriate forum for the enforcement of the award than New York for a number of reasons, including the Peruvian cap statute.
Similar to the court in Monde Re, the Court in Figueiredo held that Article III of the New York Convention and its equivalent
Article IV of the Panama Convention, providing for the application of local procedural law at the enforcement stage, allow
for the application of forum non conveniens. However, Judge Lynch, in a powerful dissent, opined that recognising a forum
non conveniens defence would undermine the enforceability of arbitral awards in general. Indeed, the very idea of forum non
conveniens is incompatible with the concept of international enforcement of foreign awards, which takes as its starting point
that the places of arbitration and principal performance of the obligation are likely to be different, while the resulting award can
be enforced internationally subject to limited grounds for refusal. Almost by definition, there is likely to be another jurisdiction
with a closer connection to the underlying dispute than the place of enforcement. Nevertheless, the whole point of enforcement
under the New York Convention is to internationalise the enforcement of awards rendered elsewhere, not to constrain a party
to enforce in the jurisdiction of origin.
Footnotes
38
New York Convention, Art. VII(2).
39
Ibid.
40
Wetter, ‘The present status of the International Court of Arbitration of the ICC: An appraisal’ (1990) 1 Am Rev Intl
Arb 91, at 93.
41
Mustill, ‘Arbitration: History and background’ (1989) 6 J Intl Arb 43, at 49. See also Schwebel, ‘A celebration of the
United Nations’ New York Convention’ (1996) 12 Arb Intl 823.

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
21
42
See van den Berg, ‘Hypothetical Draft Convention on the International Enforcement of Arbitration Agreements
and Awards: Explanatory Note’, Paper prepared for the ICCA Conference, Dublin, 2008, for the last unsuccessful
attempt to advocate for such modernisation; available online at https://www.newyorkconvention.org/11165/web/files/
document/1/6/16015.pdf. See also Gaillard, ‘The urgency of not revising the New York Convention’, in Albert Jan van
den Berg (ed.) 50 Years of the New York Convention: ICCA International Arbitration Conference, ICCA Congress
Series, Vol. 14 (Kluwer Law International, 2009), pp. 689–696.
43
New York Convention, Art. I(1).
45
At the time of writing, 167 states had acceded to the New York Convention. Of these, eighty-one had done so
on the basis of the reciprocity reservation. Some countries that had adopted the reciprocity reservation (such as
Germany and Switzerland) have subsequently withdrawn it. See UNCITRAL, ‘Status: Convention on the Recognition
and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York, 1958)’, available online at https://uncitral.un.org/en/texts/
arbitration/conventions/foreign_arbitral_awards/status2.
46
For further discussion of the role of the Model Law, see Chapter 1, paragraphs 1.109ff.
47
A similar commercial reservation was permitted in the 1923 Geneva Protocol.
48
Of the 167 states that were parties to the Convention by December 2020, fifty-five had applied the commercial
reservation. On 12 March 2001, Serbia and Montenegro confirmed Yugoslavia’s declaration of 1982 restricting the
application of the Convention to ‘economic’ disputes. Norway’s reservation stated that it would not apply the Convention
in any disputes if the subject matter were immovable property in Norway or rights in such property.
49
Indian Organic Chemical Ltd v Subsidiary 1 (US), Subsidiary 2 (US), and Chemtex Fibres Inc (Parent Co.) (US) (1979)
IV YBCA 271.
50
Ibid., at 273.
51
Union of India and ors v Lief Hoegh Co. (Norway) (1984) IX YBCA 405.
52
Ibid., at 407.
53
Ibid., at 408.
54
RM Investment & Trading Company v Boeing Company, 1994 (4) SCC 541, (1997) XXII Ybk Comm Arb 711.
55
The Tunisian courts, e.g., have construed the commercial reservation so broadly as to exclude enforcement of an award
relating to obligations arising under a contract for professional services. See Société d’Investissement Kal (Tunisia) v
Taieb Haddad (Tunisia) and Hans Barrett (1998) XXIII YBCA 770. In China, the Supreme People’s Court’s Circular on
Implementing the Convention excludes relationships between ‘foreign investors and the host government’: Notice of
the Supreme People’s Court Regarding the Implementation of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards Acceded to by China [1987] Fa Jing Fa No. 5, effective from 10 April 1987. At the other end
of the spectrum is Bautista v Star Cruises, 396 F.3d 1289 (11th Cir. 2005), in which a US court denied the application
of an exclusion from arbitration under the Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 (FAA) of the ‘contracts of employment of
seamen, railroad employees or other class of workers engaged in foreign or interstate commerce’ to the commercial
reservation. Its rationale was that ‘to read industry-specific exceptions into the broad language of the Convention Act
would be to hinder the Convention’s purpose’: ibid., at 1299.
56
New York Convention, Art. III.
57
New York Convention, Art. IV. However, see the discussion of the ‘writing requirement’ in Chapter 2.
58
Despite this, enforcement fails, from time to time, because these simple formal requirements are not fulfilled: see, e.g.,
the decisions of the Italian Court of Cassation in Lampart Vegypary Gepgyar (Hungary) v Srl Campomarzio Impianti
(Italy) (1999) XXIVa YBCA 699; the Bulgarian Supreme Court’s decision in National Electricity Co. AD (Bulgaria) v
ECONBERG Ltd (Croatia) (2000) XXV YBCA 678. Equally, an increasing number of jurisdictions take a liberal and
pragmatic approach to the fulfilment of formal requirements. By way of example, a Geneva court recognised a Chinese
award that had not been translated into French, noting that the spirit of the Convention was to reduce the obligations
for the party seeking recognition and enforcement, and that the burden of proof in respect of any questions relating to
the authenticity of the arbitration agreement or the award lay on the party opposing recognition: R SA v A Ltd (2001)
XXVI YBCA 863.
59
In Hewlett-Packard, Inc. v Berg, 867 F.Supp. 1126, 1130, n. 11 (D. Mass. 1994), the court considered Berg’s motion
to confirm an arbitral award made in his favour. While noting that the submission of uncertified copies of the arbitral
award and arbitration agreement fell short of the requirements in Art. VI of the Convention, the court nevertheless felt
able to confirm the arbitral award, in part because neither party had contested the validity of the documents submitted.
60
See, e.g., Profura v Blomgren (T 2863-07, Court of Appeals for Western Sweden), 19 March 2008. Furthermore, under
the English Arbitration Act 1996, an oral arbitration agreement is, in some circumstances, capable of enforcement: see
the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 88(1)(b).
61
New York Convention, Art. IV(2).

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
22
62
This statement, which was made in an earlier edition of this volume, has since been cited with approval by the Supreme
Court of India in Renusagar Power Co. Ltd v General Electric Co. (1995) XX YBCA 681. The Court added that, in its
opinion, ‘the scope of enquiry before the court in which the award is sought to be enforced is limited [to the grounds
mentioned in the Act] and does not enable a party to the said proceedings to impeach the Award on merits’: ibid., at 691.
63
These grounds are set out in the New York Convention, Art. V.
64
This represents a major change from the 1927 Geneva Convention.
65
New York Convention, Art. V(2).
66
This interpretation of the relevant provision of the Convention seems to be generally accepted, both in court decisions
and by experienced commentators: see, e.g., van den Berg, The New York Arbitration Convention of 1958 (Kluwer
Law International, 1981), p. 265; Delaume, ‘Enforcement against a foreign state of an arbitral award annulled in the
foreign state’ (1997) Revue du Droit International des Affaires 254. For a US decision to this effect, see Chromalloy
Aeroservices Inc. v Arab Republic of Egypt, 939 F.Supp 907, 909 (DDC 1996); for an English decision, see China
Agribusiness Development Corporation v Balli Trading [1998] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 76. See also M. Paulsson, The 1958 New
York Convention in Action (Kluwer Law International, 2016), pp. 158-160, which analyses the travaux préparatoires
of the New York Convention and concludes that the word ‘may’ was intended by the drafters to allow the competent
courts to decide whether to refuse enforcement. The suggestion that the French text of the Convention (in contrast to the
equally authentic Chinese, English, Spanish, and Russian texts) is mandatory, rather than permissive, is demolished by
J. Paulsson, ‘May or must under the New York Convention: An exercise in syntax and linguistics’ (1998) 14 Arb Intl 227.
67
The same is true for the grounds for refusal under the English Arbitration Act 1996, although it is not based on the
Model Law: see, e.g., Kanoria v Guinness [2006] EWCA Civ 222, [2006] Arb LR 513.
68
van den Berg, The New York Arbitration Convention of 1958 (Kluwer Law International, 1981), pp. 267 and 268
(emphasis added).
69
Parsons Whittemore Overseas Co. v Société Générale de L’Industrie de Papier (RAKTA), 508 F.2d 969 (2d Cir. 1974);
also reported in (1976) I YBCA 205.
70
See paragraph 11.33.
71
For further discussion of these problems, see, e.g., Kerr, ‘Concord and conflict in international arbitration’ (1996)
13 ASA Bulletin 129, paras 1-157 (also published in (1997) 13 Intl Arb 121); Proceedings of the Fourteenth ICCA
Congress, Paris, May 1998. See also J. Paulsson, ‘Why good arbitration cannot compensate for bad courts’ (2013) 30
J Intl Arb 345.
72
Such an award is normally regarded as a foreign (or international) award under the New York Convention.
73
See fn. 6.
74
For instance, in its definition of an ‘agreement in writing’ as discussed in Chapters 1 and 2.
75
See, e.g., J. Paulsson, ‘The New York Convention in international practice: Problems of assimilation’, in Blessing
(ed.) The New York Convention of 1958: A Collection of Reports and Materials Delivered at the ASA Conference
Held in Zurich 2 February 1996 (ASA, 1996), pp. 100ff; Cheng, ‘Celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the New York
Convention’ (2009) 14 ICCA Congress Series 679.
76
Model Law (as amended in 2006), Art. 36.
77
Model Law, Art. 34. The ground that is omitted, naturally, is that of the award being set aside by a national court of
the place of arbitration.
78
As already noted, this ground for refusal, and the others that follow, also appear in virtually the same terms in the Model
Law (as amended in 2006), Art. 36, as grounds for refusing enforcement of arbitral awards wherever made.
79
Fougerolle SA (France) v Ministry of Defence of the Syrian Arab Republic (1990) XV, YBCA 515.
80
Ibid.
81
Dallah Real Estate and Tourism Holding Co. v The Ministry of Religious Affairs, Government of Pakistan [2010] UKSC
46.
82
Ibid., at [2].
83
Ibid., at [8].
84
Ibid., at [66], [147], [149], [162], and [163].
85
Ibid., at [30].
86
Gouvernement du Pakistan v Société Dallah Real Estate and Tourism Holding Co., Paris Cour d’Appel, 17 February
2011 [2012] Rev Arb 369.
87
Parsons Whittemore Overseas Co. Inc. v Société Générale de l’Industrie du Papier (RAKTA), 508 F.2d 969, 975 (2d
Cir. 1974).
88
Iran Aircraft Industries v Avco Corporation, 980 F.2d 141 (2d Cir. 1992). See Chapter 10.

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
23
89
See the decision of the Stuttgart Court of Appeal, dated 6 October 2001, referred to in Liebscher, The Healthy Award:
Challenge in International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2003), p. 406.
90
Société Overseas Mining Investments Ltd v Société Commercial Caribbean Nique, Cass. Civ., Ch. 1ere, 25 March 2010,
Case No. 08-23901l.
91
Kanoria and ors v Guinness [2006] EWCA Civ 222, [2006] Arb LR 513.
92
See Liebscher, The Healthy Award: Challenge in International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International,
2003), ch. VIII, paras 2.2 and 2.3.
93
Minmetals Germany v Ferco Steel (1999) XXIV YBCA 739.
94
Many jurisdictions have taken a similarly restrictive interpretation of the due process defence to enforcement, e.g.
German courts have held that a tribunal’s refusal to hear evidence can breach the right to be heard only if such evidence
is relevant: see Decision of the Bremen Court of Appeal, 30 September 1999, (2001) 4 Intl ALR N-26.
95
Gold Reserve Inc. v Venezuela, 146 F.Supp.3d 112, 128-29 (DDC 2015).
96
Ibid.
97
This phenomenon is most notably explored by Professor Lucy Reed in the 2016 Freshfields Arbitration Lecture: see
Reed, ‘Ab(use) of due process: sword vs shield’ (2017) 33(3) Arb Intl 361–377.
98
Queen Mary 2015 International Arbitration Survey: Improvements and Innovations in International Arbitration (which
highlights that ‘the issue [of “due process paranoia”] was repeatedly raised in responses, including in nearly all the
personal interviews’).
99
It has been suggested that the behavioural model known as ‘prospect theory’, may explain why arbitrators tend to give
too much weight to low-probability events (e.g. the successful challenge of an award for ‘due process’ reasons) in
their decision-making when faced with risks and uncertainty: see Metsch and Gerby, ‘Prospect Theory and due process
paranoia: what behavioral models say about arbitrators’ assessment of risk and uncertainty’ (2020) 36(2) Arb Intl
233–252.
100
Allianz General Insurance Company Malaysia Berhad v Virginia Surety Company Labuan Branch, Originating
Summons No. WA-24NCC(ARB)-13-03/2018, at [31].
101
China Machine New Energy Corp v Jaguar Energy Guatemala LLC [2020] SGCA 12, at [97] and [103].
102
As in the Pyramids arbitration: The Arab Republic of Egypt v Southern Pacific Properties, Paris cour d’appel, 12
July 1984, published in English at (1984) 23 ILM 1048. The award of the ICC tribunal in this case was challenged
by the Egyptian government on the basis that it was not a party to the relevant agreement and so was not bound by
the arbitration clause. The Paris Court of Appeal agreed and the award was set aside. For a discussion of the case, see
Redfern, ‘Jurisdiction denied: The pyramid collapses’ (1986) JBL 15. See also (1984) IX YBCA 113 and (1985) X YBCA
487. The claimants then started fresh arbitration proceedings, under the ICSID Convention. For the rest of the story, see
Delaume, ‘The pyramids stand: The pharaohs can rest in peace’ (1993) 8 ICSID Rev—Foreign Investment LJ 231; J.
Paulsson, ‘Arbitration without privity’ (1995) 10 ICSID Rev—Foreign Investment LJ 232.
103
See Chapter 10, paragraphs 10.36ff.
104
See Chapter 10, paragraphs 10.25ff.
105
See van den Berg, ‘Court decisions on the New York Convention’, in Blessing (ed.) The New York Convention of 1958:
A Collection of Reports and Materials Delivered at the ASA Conference Held in Zurich 2 February 1996 (ASA, 1996),
p. 86.
106
Libyan American Oil Co. (Liamco) v Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Yamahirya, formerly Libyan Arab Republic (1982)
VII YBCA 382.
107
Ibid., at 388. See also Telenor Mobile Communications AS v Storm LLC, 584 F.3d 396 (2d Cir. 2009). In this case, the
US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit rejected Storm’s contention that the arbitral tribunal acted in ‘manifest
disregard of the law’ by ignoring a Ukrainian court decision that the arbitration clause in dispute was ‘null and void’.
The Court noted that there is a strong presumption against finding manifest disregard of the law by an arbitral tribunal
and upheld the confirmation of the award.
108
Parsons Whittemore Overseas Co. Inc. v Société Générale de l’Industrie du Papier (RAKTA), 508 F.2d 969 (2d Cir.
1974).
109
Libyan American Oil Co. (Liamco) v Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Yamahirya, formerly Libyan Arab Republic (1982)
VII YBCA 382, at 388.
110
Sphere Drake Insurance Ltd v Lincoln National Life Insurance Co. et al. (2007) XXXII YBCA 857.
111
A further example of where this ground was unsuccessfully relied upon is Aloe Vera of America, Inc. (US) v Asianic
Food (S) Pte Ltd (Singapore) and anor (2007) XXXII YBCA 489. One of the defendants argued that he was not a party to
the arbitration clause and that, by entering an award against him, the arbitrator went beyond the scope of the submission
to arbitration. The Supreme Court of Singapore dismissed this argument and held that the issue of whether the defendant

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
24
was a party to the arbitration clause did not fall properly under this ground. The Court further held that the defendant had
brought no evidence to prove that, under Arizona law, the award contained a decision on a matter beyond the scope of
the submission to arbitration. In contrast, and as discussed at paragraph 11.67, the Supreme Court of England and Wales
adopted a far less deferential approach, and undertook a full examination of the arbitral tribunal’s jurisdiction when
presented with a potential breach of jurisdictional issues in Dallah Real Estate and Tourism Holding Co. v Ministry
of Religious Affairs, Government of Pakistan [2010] UKSC 46. The Court also held that while it can have regard to
any statements made by the arbitral tribunal on its own jurisdiction, the Court was neither bound nor restricted by such
statements.
112
General Organization of Commerce and Industrialisation of Cereals of the Arab Republic of Syria v SpA SIMER (Società
delle Industrie Meccaniche di Rovereto) (Italy) (1983) VIII YBCA 386.
113
See China Nanhai Oil Joint Service Corporation v Gee Tai Holdings Co. Ltd (1995) XX YBCA 671. Similarly, see
Tongyuan International Trading Group v Uni-Clan [2001] 4 Intl ALR N-31.
114
China Nanhai Oil, at 672.
115
Ibid., at 673.
116
Ibid., at 677.
117
Ibid.
118
LDK Solar Hi-Tech (Suzhou) Co. Ltd v Hindustan Cleanenergy Limited, ex. parte 278/2018 in the High Court of Delhi
at New Delhi, 4 July 2018.
119
Encyclopaedia Universalis SA (Luxembourg) v Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc. (US) (2005) XXX, YBCA 1136.
120
Ibid., at [8]–[10]. See also HSN Capital LLC (US) v Productora y Comercializador de Television, SA de CV (Mexico)
(2007) XXXII YBCA 774, at [3]–[7]. China’s Supreme People’s Court has more recently gone further still: in Bunge
Agribuss v Guangdong Fengyuan [2006] Min Si Ta Zi No. 41, the designated arbitral institution appointed an arbitrator
on behalf of the respondent because of the latter’s failure to do so within the permitted time limit. Even though this
was entirely consistent with the arbitral rules selected by the parties, the Supreme People’s Court held that the failure to
consult Fengyuan on the appointment was a valid basis on which to refuse enforcement.
121
Noble Resources International Pte. Ltd v Shanghai Good Credit International Trade Co., Ltd. (2016) Hu 01 Xie Wai
Ren No. 1.
122
See, e.g., UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 34.2.
123
van den Berg, ‘Court decisions on the New York Convention’, in Blessing (ed.) The New York Convention of 1958: A
Collection of Reports and Materials Delivered at the ASA Conference Held in Zurich 2 February 1996 (ASA, 1996),
pp. 87 and 88.
124
Ibid., p. 88. If an appeal is pending, the enforcement court may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the decision on
enforcement. It may also order the party against whom enforcement is sought to give security: New York Convention,
Art. VI. As to the question of which law determines the ‘binding’ effect of an award, see Antilles Cement Corporation
(Puerto Rico) v Transficem (Spain) (2006) XXXI YBCA 846, at [9]–[13], in which the Supreme Court of Spain held, at
[13], that whether an award is binding ‘is not to be examined in accordance with the law of the State where the award
is rendered’.
125
See paragraph 11.97ff.
126
Unlike the Model Law (as amended in 2006), which sets out the limited grounds on which an award may be set aside:
see Art. 34.
127
Derains, ‘Foreword’, in ICC (ed.) Hommage à Frédéric Eisemann (ICC, 1978), p. 13, translated in J. Paulsson, ‘The case
for disregarding local standard annulments under the New York Convention’ (1996) 7 Am Rev Intl Arb 99. This is not
true of states that have different laws to govern international arbitrations from those that govern domestic arbitrations,
but nevertheless the point is a valid one.
128
See ibid. In a sense, this comes back to the ‘delocalisation’ debate, which was a source of lively controversy at the time:
see, e.g., J. Paulsson, ‘Arbitration unbound: Award detached from the law of its country of origin’ (1981) 30 ICLQ 358;
J. Paulsson, ‘Delocalisation of international commercial arbitration: When and why it matters’ (1983) 32 ICLQ 53.
See also the discussion in Chapter 3.
129
As with the European Convention of 1961.
130
For a comprehensive survey of instances in which national courts have recognised or enforced awards set aside
by the courts of the place of arbitration, see Gharavi, The International Effectiveness of the Annulment of an
Arbitral Award (Kluwer Law International, 2002). The French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1526 now expressly
provides that an application to set aside an arbitral award does not stay the proceedings to enforce the award. For
commentary on the rationale behind art. 1526, see Kleiman and Saleh, ‘Enforcement of international arbitration awards:

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
25
Latest developments’, available online at https://www.lexology.com/commentary/arbitration-adr/france/freshfields-
bruckhaus-deringer-llp/enforcement-of-international-arbitration-awards-latest-developments.
131
Hilmarton Ltd v Omnium de Traitement et de Valorisation (OTV) (1994) Rev Arb 327; English excerpts in (1995) XX
YBCA 663.
132
Ibid., at 664. When a second award in favour of the claimants was subsequently rendered in Switzerland and enforcement
was sought in France, the cour de cassation held that the issue was res judicata in the French legal order and hence that
the award could not be enforced: Hilmarton Ltd v Omnium de Traitement et de Valorisation (OTV) (1994) Rev Arb 327;
English excerpts in (1997) XXII YBCA 696. The same approach was followed in the recent case of Egyptian General
Petroleum Corporation v National Gas Company, Cass. Civ., Ch. Civ. 1ere, 13 January 2021, in which the cour de
cassation upheld the enforcement of an Egyptian award that had been set aside by the Cairo Court of Appeal.
133
Chromalloy Aeroservices Inc. v Arab Republic of Egypt, 939 F.Supp 907 (DDC 1996).
134
See paragraphs 11.78ff.
136
Société PT Putrabali Adyamulia v Société Rena Holding et Société Mnogutia Est Epices [2007] Rev Arb 507. The first
arbitral award was annulled by the High Court of London and a second award with a directly opposite outcome was
issued. Both claimant and respondent sought to enforce the awards in France. In the enforcement proceedings of the
first award, the losing party argued that the enforcement of the award would be contrary to international public policy,
but the cour de cassation did not follow that reasoning and enforced the annulled first award. The cour de cassation then
refused the enforcement of the second award on the basis that res judicata attached to the decision enforcing the first
award, which was incompatible with the second award.
137
Ibid.
138
Corporación Mexicana de Mantenimiento Integral, S. de R.L. de C.V. v PEMEX-Exploración y Producción, No.10 Civ
206 (AKH) 2013 WL 4517225 (SDNY, 27 August 2013).
139
As will be explained in paragraph 11.144, the grounds for refusal to enforce foreign arbitral awards under the Panama
Convention are similar to those under the New York Convention. In particular, Art. 5(e) of the Panama Convention
provides that: ‘[T]he recognition and execution of the decision may be refused, at the request of the party against which
it is made, only if such party is able to prove to the competent authority of the State in which recognition and execution
are requested [ … ] that the decision is not yet binding on the parties or has been annulled or suspended by a competent
authority of the State in which, or according to the law of which, the decision has been made.’
140
Pemex, at [14]. See also Yukos Capital SARL v OJSC Oil Co. Rosneft [2014] EWHC 2188, in which the English High
Court held, as a preliminary issue, that an annulment by the Moscow Arbitrazh Court of arbitral awards rendered in
Russia would not prevent the English court from giving effect to the annulled awards (under English common law
principles) if it were proven that the annulment offended against basic principles of honesty, natural justice, or English
public policy. The awards in question had also previously been enforced by the Amsterdam Appeal Court, despite the
local standard annulment in Russia.
141
See, e.g., Baker Marine (Nig.) Ltd v Chevron (Nig.) Ltd, 191 F.3d 194 (2d Cir. 1999), in which, notwithstanding
Chromalloy, the US Second Circuit refused to enforce an award that had been set aside by the court of the place
of arbitration (in this case, Nigeria). See also Spier v Tecnica, 71 F.Supp.2d 279 (SDNY 1999); TermoRio SA ESP v
Electrificadora Del Atlantico SA ESP, 421 F.Supp.2d 87 (DDC 2006), in which the US court denied the enforcement of
a Colombian arbitral award that had been set aside by the Colombian courts on the ground that Colombian law in effect
at the date of the agreement did not expressly permit the use of ICC procedural rules, which the parties had designated in
their arbitration clause. This decision was subsequently upheld by the US appellate court. For a discussion of Putrabali
and TermoRio, see Gaillard, ‘Note—29 juin 2007—Cour de Cassation (1re Ch. Civ.)’ [2007] Rev Arb 517. In Germany,
courts take into account the status of the award in the jurisdiction in which it was rendered. In 1999, the Court of
Appeal of Rostock refused to enforce an award rendered by the Moscow Maritime Arbitration Commission that had
been set aside in Russia: Oberlandsgericht Rostock, 28 October 1999, (2000) XXV YBCA 717, at 719. However, when
the Russian Supreme Court overturned the lower courts’ decisions setting aside the award, the German Federal Supreme
Court similarly reversed the decision of the Court of Appeal of Rostock and deemed it enforceable: Bundesgerichtshof,
22 February 2001, (2004) XXIX YBCA 724. A similar approach is taken in Chile: see EDF Internacional SA v Endesa
Internacional SA and YPF SA, Supreme Court of Chile, 8 September 2011, (2012) 5 Arbitraje: Revista de Arbitraje
Comercial y de Inversiones 915, in which the Court held that an Argentinean award set aside at the place of arbitration
could not be enforced in Chile. In Maximov v OJSC Novolipetsky Metallurgichesky Kombinat [2017] EWHC 1911
(Comm) the English High Court held that for the English courts to enforce awards that had been set aside by the courts
in the place of arbitration, the decision to set aside ‘must be so wrong as to be evidence of bias, or be such that no court
acting in good faith could have arrived at it’. In Esso Exploration and Production Nigeria Limited v Nigeria National
Petroleum Corporation, 397 F.Supp.3d 323 (SDNY 2019), the US District Court for the Southern District of New York
refused to enforce an award that had been annulled in Nigeria, holding that although the US courts can enforce an award

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
26
that was set aside at the seat if the judgment setting aside the award is contrary to US public policy, this ‘public policy
exception is narrow and available only in “rare circumstances” ’, and ‘[t]he standard is high[] and infrequently met’ (at
[351]–[354]).
142
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(e).
143
See Chapter 3.
144
International Standard Electric Corporation (US) v Bridas Sociedad Anonima Petrolera (Argentina) (1992) VII YBCA
639.
145
Ibid., at 644 and 645.
146
Ibid., at 645.
147
Venture Global Engineering v Satyam Computer Services [2008] INSC 40.
148
Venture Global Engineering v Satyam Computer Services, 233 Fed. Appx 517 (6th Cir. 2007). Similar decisions
have been rendered by courts in Indonesia and Russia. In Karaha Bodas Co. LLC (Cayman Islands) v Persusahaan
Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gas Bumi Negara aka Pertamina (Indonesia), US District Court, Southern District of
Texas, Houston Division, 17 April 2003, (2003) XXVIII YBCA 908, the Central Jakarta District Court annulled a Swiss
arbitral award applying Indonesian substantive law in favour of Karaha against Pertamina. In Russia, similar arrogations
of authority to annul an award have occasionally emerged: see OAO Stoilensky GOK v Mabetex Project Engineering
SA, et al. and Interconstruction Project Management SA v OAO Stoilensky GOK, Case No. A08-7941/02-18, Federal
Commercial Court of the Central District, 2 September 2003; Collective Fishing Farm Krasnoye Znamya v White Arctic
Marine Resources Ltd, Case No. A05-4274/2007, Federal Commercial Court of the North-Western District, 25 July
2007, in which Art. IX(1) of the European Convention of 1961 was used as a basis to set aside awards rendered in
Sweden and Norway, respectively, simply because Russian law applied to the substance of the dispute.
149
Bharat Aluminium Co. v Kaiser Aluminum Technical Service, Inc., Civil Appeal No. 7019 of 2005, Decision of 6
September 2012, given at New Delhi.
150
See, e.g. ICC Rules, Art. 29(1) (providing that ‘[a] party that needs urgent interim or conservatory measures that cannot
await the constitution of an arbitral tribunal (‘Emergency Measures’) may make an application for such measures
pursuant to the Emergency Arbitrator Rules [… ]’); and SCC Rules, Appendix II, Article 1(1) (providing that ‘[a] party
may apply for the appointment of an Emergency Arbitrator until the case has been referred to an Arbitral Tribunal [ … ]’).
151
Resort Condominiums International Inc. v Ray Bolwell and Resort Condominiums, Pty. Ltd., Supreme Court of
Queensland, Australia, 29 October 1993, XX Y.B. COM. ARB. 628 (1995).
152
Supreme Court No. 5468-2009, Western Technology Services International Inc. (Westech) v a Chilean company, Cauchos
Industriales SA (Cainsa), 11 May 2010 (case described in UNCITRAL’s Case Law on UNCITRAL Texts (CLOUT),
dated 23 August 2011 (A/CN.9/SER.C/ABSTRACTS/111), at 5.
153
Living Consulting Group AB (Sweden) v OOO Sokotel (Russian Federation), Presidium of the Highest Arbitrazh Court,
Russian Federation, 5 October 2010, A56-63115/2009, in Albert Jan van den Berg (ed.), XXXVI Yearbook Com. Arb.
317, 318 (Kluwer, 2011): an SCC tribunal rendered an award ordering the respondent to pay the claimant an advance
that the claimant had paid on behalf of the respondent earlier in the arbitration proceedings. Although awards of this
nature are expressly permitted under the SCC Rules, the Supreme Arbitrazh Court of the Russian Federation declined to
enforce the award, citing Art. V(1)(e) of the New York Convention. Specifically, the Russian court considered the award
in question to be of an interim nature and therefore unenforceable, noting that the New York Convention is applicable
only to final awards on the merits.
154
Island Creek Coal Sales Company v City of Gainesville Florida, 729 F.2d 1046, USCA (6th Cir. 1985); see also Yahoo!
Inc. v Microsoft Corp [2013] 983 F.Supp 2d 310, 319 (enforcing interim measures rendered by an emergency arbitrator
under the AAA-ICDR Rules, holding that ‘if an arbitral award of equitable relief based upon a finding of irreparable
harm is to have any meaning at all, the parties must be capable of enforcing or vacating it at the time it is made’).
155
Bharat Aluminium Co v Kaiser Aluminium Technical [2012] 9 SCC 552; Future Retail Ltd. v Amazon.com Investment
Holdings LLC & ors [2020] CS(COMM) 493/2020.
156
Hong Kong Arbitration Ordinance (Cap. 609), s. 22B (providing that ‘[a]ny emergency relief granted, whether in or
outside Hong Kong, by an emergency arbitrator under the relevant arbitration rules is enforceable in the same manner
as an order or direction of the Court that has the same effect’) and s. 61(5) (providing that ‘an interim measure’ is
‘enforceable in the same manner as an order or direction of the Court that has the same effect’); Singapore International
Arbitration Act 1994 (as amended in 2020), s. 2 (providing that the definition of an ‘award’ expressly includes any
‘interim, interlocutory or partial award’, and the definition of an ‘arbitral tribunal’ expressly includes an ‘emergency
arbitrator’).
158
Maximov v Novolipetsky Metallurgicheskiy Kombinat, Case No. N VAS-15384/11, Ruling of the Supreme Commercial
Arbitrazh Court, 30 January 2012.

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
27
159
For example, in relation to disputes associated with the ownership of shares or participation interests in the authorised
capital of Russian companies, the arbitration must be administered by an arbitral institution authorised by the Russian
Government: see the Federal Law ‘On Arbitration Proceedings in the Russian Federation’ No. 382-FZ, Art. 45(7).
160
Aloe Vera of America, Inc. (US) v Asianic Food (S) Pte Ltd (Singapore) and anor (2007) XXXII YBCA 489.
161
Ibid. Similarly, in Dallah Real Estate & Tourism Holding Co. v Ministry of Religious Affairs, Pakistan [2010] UKSC
46, the UK Supreme Court held that, in considering jurisdiction over a non-signatory, ‘arbitral tribunals are entitled to
consider their own jurisdiction, and to do so in the form of an award’, but added that ‘the last word as to whether or not
an alleged arbitral tribunal actually has jurisdiction will lie with the court’ (at [86]).
162
New York Convention, Art. V(2)(b).
163
See Decision of the Geneva Cour de Justice, 11 December 1997, (1998) XXIII YBCA 764.
164
Richardson v Mellish (1824) 2 Bing 229, at 252 per Burrough J, [1824–34] All ER 258.
165
Kerr, ‘Concord and conflict in international arbitration’ (1997) 13 Arb Intl 121, at 140.
166
Soleimany v Soleimany [1999] QB 785.
167
Ibid., at 800.
168
See the discussion of Parsons Whittemore Overseas Co. Inc. v Société Générale de l’Industrie du Papier (RAKTA),
508 F.2d 969 (2d Cir. 1974) at paragraph 11.60. See also the Second Circuit decision in MGM Productions Group
Inc. v Aeroflot Russian Airlines, WL 234871 (2d Cir. 2004), in which Aeroflot sought to challenge a Stockholm award
because it compensated the claimant for Aeroflot’s non-performance of an agreement, the provisions of which allegedly
violated the United States–Iran Transactions Regulations adopted pursuant to executive orders issued by the President
of the United States under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act of 1977. The Second Circuit rejected the
challenge, holding, at [3], that: ‘Courts construe the public policy limitation in the Convention very narrowly and apply
it only when enforcement would violate the forum state’s “most basic notions of morality and justice”.’ In this case,
even if the agreement in operation did violate the Iranian Transactions Regulations, which the arbitral tribunal itself had
found was not the case, the award would not contravene public policy, because ‘a violation of United States foreign
policy does not contravene public policy as contemplated in Art V of the Convention’: ibid., at [5].
169
Westacre Investments Inc. v Jugoimport-SPDR Holding Co. Ltd. [1999] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 65 (CA).
170
See Rogers and Kaley, ‘The impact of public policy in international commercial arbitration’ (1999) 65 J CIArb 4.
171
This is clear from the text of Art. V(2) itself and, accordingly, the Supreme Court of India was right to reject the argument
that the references (in the Indian statute that enacted the Convention) to ‘public policy’, rather than to the ‘public policy
of India’, meant that the words were not restricted to India, but would extend to the laws governing the contract and the
place of arbitration: see Renusagar Power Co. Ltd (India) v General Electric Co. (US) (1995) XX YBCA 681.
172
Sonatrach, 407 US 1 (1972).
173
Bremen v Zapata Offshore Co, 417 US 506 (1974).
174
Mitsubishi Motor Corporation v Soler Chrysler-Plymouth Inc., 473 US 614, 105 S.Ct. 3346, 87 L.Ed.2d 444 (1985).
175
Sonatrach (Algeria) v Distrigas Corporation (United States District Court) Massachusetts, 80 BR 606, 612 (1987).
176
Sonatrach (Algeria) v Distrigas Corporation (United States District Court) Massachusetts, (1995) XX YBCA 795.
177
See the discussion of Parsons Whittemore Overseas Co. Inc. v Société Générale de l’Industrie du Papier (RAKTA), 508
F.2d 969 (2d Cir. 1974) at paragraph 11.60.
178
Ibid., at 973.
179
Ibid., at 974.
180
RBRG Trading (UK) Ltd v Sinocore International Co. Ltd [2018] EWCA Civ 838.
181
Ibid, at [25].
182
Renusagar Power Co. Ltd (India) v General Electric Co. (US) (1995) XX YBCA 681.
183
Ibid., at 702.
184
See, e.g., SA Laboratoires Eurosilicone v Société Bez Medizintechnik GmbH [2004] Rev Arb 133.
185
(1995) XX YBCA 762.
186
(1987) XII YBCA 489.
187
See, e.g., Cases Nos 20, 64/128 and 16, 20, 47/129, 7 April 2013, Cairo Court of Appeal, Commercial Circuit No. 7.
188
For example, Art. 814 of the Lebanese Arbitration Provisions provides that ‘arbitral awards shall be recognized and
granted exequatur [ … ] if they do not manifestly violate international public policy’.
189
In a more recent example, the Higher Regional Court of Berlin refused to recognise a foreign arbitral award to the
extent that the award ordered a party to pay penalty interest, on the grounds that the high interest rate was contrary to
German public policy: see Judgment of 7 February 2019, 12 Sch 5/18 (Kammergericht Berlin). The Saudi Arabian courts

Section B. - Enforcement under the New York Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638676...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
28
often refuse to enforce the interest element included in foreign arbitral awards since interest is considered a usury (riba)
under Shari’ah rules: riba is considered to include any type of interest. For a more detailed discussion on this subject,
see: Emre, ‘A refusal reason of recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards: Public policy’ (2019) 56(2)
Zbornik Radova Pravnog Fakulteta u Splitu 503, at 510 and Güzeloğlu, ‘The role of Shari’a law on the enforcement
of arbitral awards in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’ (28 January 2016). https://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?
g=71e501f7-8552-45fd-8797-077fa25e88a3.
190
Peerenboom, ‘Seek truth from facts: An empirical study of enforcement of arbitral awards in the PRC’ (2001) 49 Am
J Comp L 39.
191
Explanations on and Answers to Practical Questions in Trial of Foreign-Related Commercial and Maritime Cases (No.
1), Issued by the Supreme People’s Court on 8 April 2004, Art. 43.
192
Fei, ‘Public policy as a bar to enforcement of international arbitral awards: A review of the Chinese approach’ (2010)
26 Arb Intl 301, at 311.
193
Reply of the Supreme People’s Court in the matter regarding the request by Beijing First Intermediary People’s Court
to Refuse Enforcement of Arbitral Award [1997] Jing Ta 35 (‘Heavy Metal’).
194
For further discussion of the topic, see Yeoh, ‘Enforcement of dispute outcomes’, in Moser (ed.) Managing Business
Disputes in Today’s China (Kluwer Law International, 2007), p. 274.
195
Notice Regarding the Local People’s Court Handling Foreign-related Arbitral Awards and Foreign Arbitral Awards,
Issued by the Supreme People’s Court on 28 August 1995.
196
Chen and Howes, ‘Public policy and the enforcement of foreign arbitration awards in China’ (2010) 3 Intl News 14.
197
Fei, ‘Public policy as a bar to enforcement of international arbitral awards: A review of the Chinese approach’ (2010)
26 Arb Intl 301, at 305–307.
198
See Presidium of Supreme Commercial Arbitrazh Court, Information Letter No. 96, 22 December 2005, s. 29; Presidium
of Supreme Commercial Arbitrazh Court, Information Letter No. 156, 26 February 2013, s. 6.
199
ILA, Final Report of the Committee on International Commercial Arbitration on Public Policy (2004) 1 TDM.
200
Ibid. This seems to be a circular definition that is of little assistance. See also SA Compagnie commercial André v SA
Tradigrain France [2001] Rev Arb 773.
201
Eco Swiss China Time Ltd v Benetton International NV, Case C-126/97 [1999] ECR I–3055.
202
Ibid., at [49].
203
See Thales Air Defence BV v GIE Euromissile et al., Paris cour d’appel, 18 November 2004; also the judgment in SNF
SAS v Cytec Industries BV (Holland), Cass. Civ., Ch. Civ. 1ere, 4 June 2008, in which the cour de cassation explicitly
reiterated the narrow approach to the application of public policy.
204
See Tensacciai v Terra Armata, Swiss Federal Court, 8 March 2006.
205
See Marketing Displays International Inc. v VR Van Raalte Reclame BV, Dutch Court of Appeal, The Hague, 24 March
2005; SNF v Cytec Industries BV, Brussels Court of First Instance, 8 March 2007.
206
See the decision of the US Supreme Court in Mitsubishi v Soler Chrysler-Plymout h, 473 US 614 (1985).
207
See Baxter International v Abbott Laboratories, 315 F.3d 829 (7th Cir. 2003).
208
See US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, American Central Eastern Texas Gas Co. v Union Pacific Resources
Group, Inc., 93 Fed. Appx. 1, 2004 WL 136091 (5th Cir. 27 Jan. 2004).
209
Monegasque de Reassurance SAM (Monde Re) v NAK Naftogart of Ukraine and State of Ukraine, 311 F.3d 488 (2d
Cir. 2002).
210
Figueiredo Ferraz E Engenharia de Projeto Ltda v Republic of Peru, 663 F.4d 384 (2d Cir. 2011).
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
