No Involvement of “Responding Party” up to File..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
No Involvement of “Responding Party” up to File Transmission
to Emergency Arbitrator
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
No Involvement of “Responding Party” up to File Transmission to Emergency Arbitrator
29-57
When the Secretariat sends the Application to the responding party, it does so purely for information, with no request to comment
on the Application. At this stage, the responding party is not invited to state its position regarding the fulfillment of the second and
third admissibility conditions, which the President of the ICC Court is to assess on the basis of the Application alone. Likewise,
the responding party will not be asked to give its view regarding the profile of the Emergency Arbitrator and the choice, if any,
of the place of Emergency Arbitration proceedings, although the applicant may address such issues in the Application. The
tension that exists between the right of due process and the need to promptly put an Emergency Arbitrator in place will require
particular care by the ICC Court’s President in the appointment process.
29-58
A responding party should, however, keep in mind that nothing under the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions prevents it from
submitting, on its own initiative, any (relevant) comments it may have to the ICC Court’s Secretariat and/or President before
the latter appoints the Emergency Arbitrator. For such comments to be taken into consideration and to have any effect, the
responding party will have to react extremely quickly. Not every responding party will be in a position to do so. In practice, a
responding party will often reply to the Application only once the Emergency Arbitrator has been appointed, and once the latter
has invited that party to do so within a specified and, by definition, short time limit.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
