Article 26(4): Parties and representatives attendance, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406897 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 26(4): Parties and representatives attendance
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Persons in attendance
Article 26(4): Parties and representatives attendance
“The parties may appear in person or through duly authorized representatives. In addition, they may be assisted by
advisers.”
26-54
In an ICC arbitration, parties have the right to be represented by the persons of their choice. 434  A distinction should however be
made between “authorized representatives” and “advisers”. Usually, the parties have attorneys represent them in the arbitration.
Thus, an attorney may have both capacities, but this may not always be the case. As an adviser, he or she would not need a power
of attorney. On the other hand, as a representative of a party, he or she might need a power of attorney. In addition, lawyers are
often not admitted to practice in the place of arbitration. The major centres of arbitration do not appear to have any longer any
restrictions on the right of lawyers from other countries to argue cases in those countries. 435
26-55
Lawyers who attend hearings are generally not required to present powers of attorney, although powers of attorney may have
been filed at the time of the Terms of Reference or pursuant to art.17.
26-56
It is relatively frequent in ICC arbitration to have co-counsel. One law firm may represent the party on a regular basis and
be familiar with its activities and personnel and be located in the same country as the party. The other law firm may be more
familiar with the rules of law governing the arbitration or ICC arbitration in general. One of the law firms will need to have a
power of attorney from the party it acts for, and may have the right to delegate the power to another lawyer.
26-57
Usually, in addition to the attorney, a party will be represented by an executive at the hearings. The presence of an executive is
viewed as being important to ensure that the attorney is in a position to obtain instructions from his client as to any procedural
issue that may arise during the hearings. It may be that with respect to major issues it is necessary to refer to persons who are
not at the hearing. However, the presence of an executive at the hearing is helpful and virtually expected.
26-58
If the client representative is also a witness in the proceedings, then a party may wish to have the executive attend throughout
the hearings. In such cases, the Tribunal will frequently have the executive testify either first, or if the person is an executive of
the respondent, prior to any other witnesses of the respondent. Tribunals vary in their approach but most seek to find a solution
that allows a party to effectively instruct their lawyers during the proceedings while at the same time ensuring that witness
evidence is not coloured by prior witness testimony.
Footnotes

Article 26(4): Parties and representatives attendance, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406897 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
434
See art.17(2) and the discussion at para.17-7 and following regarding the possibility to exclude a party’s choice of new
counsel, once the Tribunal has been constituted.
435
In California this restriction was lifted only in July 2018.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
