Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 9 - Award
Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal
(a) Introduction
9. 102
The purpose of an arbitration is to arrive at a binding and enforceable decision. For the parties and their lawyers, it is the
dispositive section of an award that is most important. Yet there is more to an award, including how a tribunal of arbitrators goes
about reaching its decision, which has become an increasing feature of the literature concerning international arbitration. 149
9. 103
The task that faces arbitral tribunals is not easy. A leading English judge described judicial decision making as follows:
The judge’s role in determining what happened at some time in the past is not of course peculiar to him. Historians,
auditors, accident investigators of all kinds, loss adjusters and doctors are among those who, to a greater or lesser
extent, may be called upon to perform a similar function. But there are three features of the judge’s role which
will not apply to all these other investigations. First, he is always presented with conflicting versions of the
events in question: if there is no effective dispute, there is nothing for him to decide. Secondly, his determination
necessarily takes place subject to formality and restraints (evidential or otherwise) attendant upon proceedings
in court. Thirdly, his determination has a direct practical effect upon people’s lives in terms of their pockets,
activities or reputations. 150
9. 104
The same task faces an arbitral tribunal, but with a number of important differences.
9. 105
First, such an arbitral tribunal is not a permanent court or tribunal (except in special cases such as the Iran–US Claims Tribunal).
Secondly, the tribunal may be composed of arbitrators of different professions: accountants, engineers, or whatever the case
may require. Thirdly, even if all of the members of the tribunal are lawyers, they will often be of different nationalities, with
different languages and different legal backgrounds—common law, civil law, Shari’ah, and so forth.
9. 106
How will this disparate, ad hoc group of people set about trying to reach their decision? They will read the parties’ submissions,
the witness statements, and the (sometimes copious) number of documents filed in support of each party’s case; they will listen
to evidence and oral argument. After this, although (as the saying goes) they may not be any wiser, they should certainly be
better informed. As a case proceeds, each arbitrator will no doubt begin to form his or her own view as to how the various issues
that have arisen ought to be determined, but the tribunal should arrive at a decision together. If the tribunal consists of three
arbitrators, there must be some exchange of views, some dialogue between them, if they are to do so.
9. 107
There are no set rules as to how a decision should be made. Each arbitration is different and each arbitral tribunal is different.
What works well with one tribunal may not work at all with another. However, the advice written by a former president of the
LCIA may serve as a useful guideline:

Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
While it is important for the chairman not to rush his fellow arbitrators into reaching a definitive decision on all
outstanding issues—indeed, it is incumbent on the chairman to remind the members of the tribunal that their work
is only just beginning and that any opinions expressed will be considered to be provisional—it is, however, crucial
to ascertain whether or not a consensus seems likely to emerge on one or more of the issues to be decided. If there
is disagreement between the two party-appointed arbitrators, the chairman will begin to earn his extra stipend.
In the event a consensus on certain issues is clear, the chairman will generally offer to prepare a first draft of an
eventual award, for discussion at a later date.
No member of the tribunal must exert any pressure on his colleagues during this first session. This initial session
should provide an opportunity for all arbitrators to engage in a relaxed dialogue with one another.
Each arbitrator must feel that he is allowed to ‘think out loud’ in this informal setting. Personally, whether I serve
as chairman or party-designated arbitrator, I tend to listen at least as much as to speak during such a first encounter.
I wish my colleagues to know what my initial views are, but I also want to know how my colleagues believe they
can inform the decision-making process which has begun. 151
9. 108
This passage raises an interesting question as to whether there is any difference between, on the one hand, informal discussions
among members of the tribunal (for example over a meal or during a coffee break) and, on the other, formal deliberations (in
the French sense). One of the reasons why the issue of deliberations is infrequently addressed is undoubtedly the fact that some
systems encourage secrecy in the deliberative process. For example, in French law, as in some other civil law countries, the
deliberations of the arbitrators are indeed ‘secret’. 152  In French law, the interchange of views between arbitrators is formalised
as a ‘deliberation’. The Civil Code that governs French internal (or domestic) arbitrations requires the arbitrators to fix the
date at which their deliberations will start (le délibéré sera pronouncé), 153  after which no further submissions by the parties
are allowed. One distinguished French academician and author considers the rule that there must be a ‘deliberation’ before
there is any award by the tribunal to be a rule of international public order. 154  Although it does not necessarily follow that the
deliberations should be secret, for another French commentator the rule that such a ‘deliberation’ should be, and should remain,
so is a ‘fundamental principle, which constitutes one of the mainsprings of arbitration, as it does of all judicial decisions’. 155
However, this is not solely a French position. Rule 15 of the ICSID Rules states:
 
(1) The deliberations of the Tribunal shall take place in private and remain secret.
 
(2) Only members of the Tribunal shall take part in its deliberations. No other person shall be
admitted unless the Tribunal decides otherwise.
9. 109
In a well-known case, 156  the Swedish Court of Appeal discussed what is necessary for a proper deliberation when considering
a request by the Czech Republic to set aside an arbitral award. One of the grounds put forward was that the arbitrator nominated
by the Czech Republic had, as he alleged in his dissenting opinion, been deliberately excluded by his fellow arbitrators from
the deliberations of the tribunal. The Court referred to a seemingly conflicting balance of considerations: the equality of the
arbitrators, balanced against the need for the tribunal to reach a conclusion without undue delay. The Court said, in summary,
that the arbitrators should be treated equally, but that the procedures adopted should also be cost-effective and flexible. There
were no formal rules, and so the deliberations might be oral or written, or both; deadlines could be set, but could also be changed
as required, and so forth. The Swedish Court of Appeal added that whilst due process must be guaranteed:
[W]hen two arbitrators have agreed upon the outcome of the dispute, the third arbitrator cannot prolong the
deliberations by demanding continued discussions in an attempt to persuade the others as to the correctness of his
opinion. The dissenting arbitrator is thus not afforded any opportunity to delay the writing of the award. 157
9. 110

Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
The rule as to the secrecy, or confidentiality, of the tribunal’s discussions has significant consequences. 158  It was considered
by a former president of the ICJ, in considering a challenge to one of the members of the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal,
whose impartiality had been questioned on the basis of a dissenting opinion that he had issued. In the course of the decision
on the challenge, it was held that:
A rule of the confidentiality of the deliberations must, if it is to be effective, apply generally to the deliberation
stage of a tribunal’s proceedings and cannot realistically be confined to what is said in a formal meeting of all
the members in the deliberation room. The form or forms the deliberation takes varies greatly from one tribunal
to another. Anybody who has had experience of courts and tribunals knows perfectly well that much of the
deliberation work, even in courts like the ICJ which have formal rules governing the deliberation, is done less
formally. In particular the task of drafting is better done in small groups rather than by the whole court attempting
to draft round the table. Revelations of such informal discussion and of suggestions made could be very damaging
and seriously threaten the whole deliberation process. 159
9. 111
As noted, there must obviously be a serious interchange of views between the members of the tribunal as they try to arrive at a
decision that can be expressed in their award. This interchange of views may be characterised, as it is in the ICSID Rules and
in the French Civil Code, as a ‘deliberation’, but this does not mean that the members of the tribunal have to sit together in
solemn conclave, like cardinals electing a new pope, until a decision is reached.
9. 112
What is likely to happen in practice is that the arbitrators exchange views informally, as the case progresses—particularly in the
course of the hearing or immediately upon its conclusion—and then decide how to proceed with the formulation of their award.
The chairman of the tribunal often prepares a list of the issues that he or she considers critical, then asks the co-arbitrators to
amend, or add to, this list and perhaps express a preliminary view on the issues raised—either orally or, more commonly, in
writing—with each arbitrator being given the opportunity to comment upon what the others have written.
9. 113
Where the arbitral tribunal consists of a sole arbitrator, the need to consult with other members of the tribunal and to try to
reconcile possibly differing opinions does not arise. However, the sole arbitrator will still need to consider the evidence and
arguments of the parties, work through a list of the significant issues, and generally come to a conclusion on the matters in
dispute as part of the process of drafting an award.
9. 114
For a sole arbitrator, it is only his or her decision that counts. But what happens when there is a tribunal of three arbitrators
and, despite their best efforts, they find themselves unable to agree? Ideally, decisions are made unanimously; but there must
be a ‘fall-back’ position, and, on this, the international and institutional rules of arbitration differ. Some favour majority voting;
others give the presiding arbitrator a decisive role.
(b) Tribunal psychology
9. 115
Most international arbitrations are determined by an arbitral tribunal composed of three arbitrators. The aim of their deliberations
must be to achieve a unanimous award, since this will be seen as both authoritative and conclusive. If unanimity cannot be
achieved, however, the next best thing is to have a majority award, rather than an award by the chairman alone—or no award at
all. In one of the Iran–United States arbitrations, a US-appointed arbitrator concurred in a majority award, although he thought
that the damages awarded were half what they should have been. ‘Why then do I concur in this inadequate award?’ he asked
rhetorically; ‘Because’, he answered, ‘there are circumstances in which “something is better than nothing”.’ 160
9. 116
There may be concern over the way in which arbitrators will conduct themselves in deliberations when they have been directly
appointed by one of the parties to a dispute. However, parties rarely abuse the arbitral process to the extent of nominating an

Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
arbitrator whose specific function is to vote for the party who nominated him or her, although they do appoint arbitrators whom
they believe are likely to be sympathetic to the case that they wish to advance during the proceedings. As has been said:
It should not be surprising if party appointed arbitrators tend to view the facts and law in a light similar to their
appointing parties. After all, the parties are careful to select arbitrators with views similar to theirs. But this does
not mean that arbitrators will violate their duty of impartiality and independence. 161
9. 117
In an international arbitration, each arbitrator, however appointed, is under a duty to act impartially and to reach a determination
of the issues in a fair and unbiased manner. 162  It follows that it would be entirely improper if a party-nominated arbitrator were
to hold private discussions with the party who nominated that arbitrator about the substance of the dispute. However, it is not
improper for a party-nominated arbitrator to ensure that the arbitral tribunal properly understands the case being advanced by
that party, 163  and a party-nominated arbitrator who is convinced of the merits of the case being put forward by the appointing
party can have a significant impact on the private deliberations of the arbitral tribunal when the award is discussed. Interestingly,
the UNCITRAL Rules extend the duty of the arbitrator in relation to disclosing circumstances giving rise to a potential conflict
of interest so that it is owed not only to the parties, but also to the other members of the tribunal. 164
9. 118
The behaviour of the party-appointed arbitrators affects the dynamics of deliberations for the presiding arbitrator, although the
presiding arbitrator will form his or her own view of the case. If it is difficult to achieve a majority award, inevitably the presiding
arbitrator leans towards a compromise with a party-nominated arbitrator who follows the proceedings intelligently, asks good
questions of each party, and puts forward well-reasoned arguments, rather than with someone who shows little interest in the
proceedings and gives the impression of being there simply as the advocate nominee or mouthpiece of the appointing party.
(c) Bargaining process
9. 119
An award of monetary compensation arrived at by a majority vote is sometimes the result of a bargaining process in the
deliberations that might be more common in a marketplace than in a judicial, or quasi-judicial, proceeding. To describe it as a
process of eliminating alternatives by ‘a proper sequence of votes’ is a euphemism. However, particularly when carried out in
a structured manner and in relation to pre-defined issues, ‘bargaining’ may be a sensible way in which to proceed. Indeed, such
a procedure is envisaged in the 1966 European Convention providing a Uniform Law on Arbitration (known as the ‘Strasbourg
Uniform Law’), which provides that:
Except where otherwise stipulated, if the arbitrators are to award a sum of money, and a majority cannot be
obtained for any particular sum, the votes for the highest sum shall be counted as votes for the next highest
sum until a majority is obtained.
9. 120
Where there are a number of different issues, it is theoretically possible for the members of the arbitral tribunal to be split on
some issues and unanimous on others. In such cases, the question arises as to whether all of the issues should be decided by the
presiding arbitrator alone (if this is permitted under the relevant rules of arbitration) 166  or whether the award may be divided
into various parts. If there is lack of unanimity in relation to one or two issues out of many issues, the dispositive part of the
award could reflect this by recording that those issues were decided by a majority of the tribunal, rather than by the tribunal
as a whole. If there is no majority in relation to a considerable number of issues, the award as a whole may have to be that
of the presiding arbitrator if the relevant rules permit; otherwise, the arbitrators will have to continue, in one way or another,
to try to reach a majority decision.

Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
(d) Majority voting
9. 121
As an example of majority voting, Article 33.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules provides: ‘When there is more than one arbitrator, any
award or other decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be made by a majority of the arbitrators.’ However, Article 33.2 makes an
exception to this rule in relation to questions of procedure and allows the presiding arbitrator to decide such questions on his or
her own, subject to revision by the tribunal. This provision gives rise to two potential problems.
9. 122
The first is how to identify procedural issues: for example, is a determination of the place of arbitration under Article 18 of the
Rules a question of procedure? If it is, then, in the absence of a majority, the presiding arbitrator may decide. However, Professor
Pieter Sanders, as special consultant to the UNCITRAL Secretariat, played a major role in drafting the original UNCITRAL
Rules. He expressed the view that the determination of the place of arbitration should not be considered a procedural question;
and should therefore not be a function of the presiding arbitrator alone. 167
9. 123
The second problem is that, in order to achieve an award, a majority must be reached, because there is no fall-back position
under Article 33.1. Professor Sanders stated that ‘the arbitrators are [ … ] forced to continue their deliberations until a majority,
and probably a compromise solution, has been reached’. 168
9. 124
This is a potentially serious defect in the UNCITRAL Rules, since there may be cases in which it is genuinely impossible to
achieve a majority. 169  In construction arbitrations, for example, there are often many different issues in relation to separate
claims and it is possible for each individual arbitrator to have a different view on these different issues. Furthermore, the
arbitrators may have widely differing views on questions of quantum in such cases, with no real possibility of a compromise
solution being achieved in order to obtain a majority award. The Model Law, Article 29 of which adopts the same position as
the UNCITRAL Rules, is open to the same criticism.
9. 125
The approach in the ICC Rules is different. These rules provide that where the arbitral tribunal is composed of more than one
arbitrator, the award, if not unanimous, may be made by a majority of the tribunal; and if there is no majority, the chairman
of the arbitral tribunal makes the decision alone. 170  The same approach is adopted in the Swiss Private International Law Act
1987 (Swiss PIL), the Swiss Rules, the English Arbitration Act 1996, and the LCIA Rules. 171
9. 126
In contrast to the UNCITRAL Rules, under the ICC Rules, the Swiss Rules, and the LCIA Rules, the pressure is on each of
the co-arbitrators to join the presiding arbitrator in forming a majority. This is because the presiding arbitrator is entitled to
make an award alone. However, if this happens, the party-chosen arbitrators will not have participated in the award; 172  instead,
the award will have been made by a person who may have been chosen for the parties by an arbitral institution or some other
appointing authority.
9. 127
In ICSID arbitrations, majority rule also prevails. The ICSID Convention provides that ‘[t]he Tribunal shall decide questions
by a majority of the votes of all its members’, 173  and this provision is carried into effect by the ICSID Rules, Rule 16.1 which
states: ‘Decisions of the Commission shall be taken by a majority of the votes of all its members. Abstention shall count as
a negative vote.’ In this context, ‘majority rule’ means that at least two of the three members of the arbitral tribunal must be
prepared to agree with each other, whatever element of bargaining or compromise this might involve. An arbitral tribunal is
bound to render a decision or to resign. It is not permitted to say that it is undecided and unable to make an award. It may not
bring in a finding of non liquet (on the ground of silence, or obscurity of the law, or otherwise). 174

Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
9. 128
It may be difficult for individual members of an arbitral tribunal to alter their respective positions so as to achieve the necessary
majority. The notes to the ICSID Rules record that, when the Rules were originally formulated, consideration was given to
providing for the possibility of the arbitral tribunal being unable to reach a majority decision. It was concluded, however, that
no problem would arise with questions that admitted of only a positive or a negative answer. If a positive proposition were to
fail to achieve a majority, it would automatically fail since, under the ICSID Rules, an abstention is counted as a negative vote.
Where the question could not be answered by a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no’, as in the determination of the amount of compensation
to be awarded, it was concluded that ‘a decision can normally be reached by a proper sequence of votes by which alternatives
are successively eliminated’. 175
9. 129
Thus there are various ways in which the awards of three-member arbitral tribunals may be made. They may be made
unanimously, or by a majority, or by the presiding arbitrator alone if he or she is empowered to decide alone under the rules
governing the proceedings.
(e) Concurring and dissenting opinions
(i) Concurring opinions
9. 130
A ‘separate’, or ‘concurring’, opinion is one that is given by an arbitrator who agrees with the result of the arbitration, but
who either does not agree with the reasoning or does not agree with the way in which the award is formulated. These opinions
are rarely given in commercial arbitrations. They are more frequently found in investment treaty arbitrations, in which the
practice of the ICJ tends to be followed. 176
(ii) Dissenting opinions
9. 131
Dissenting opinions pose greater problems and are less frequently delivered. There is a broad division of philosophy and
practice as to whether the giving of dissenting opinions should be permitted. In arbitrations between states, the right to submit
a dissenting opinion was asserted as long ago as the middle of the nineteenth century, in the Alabama Claims arbitration 177
between the United Kingdom and the United States. The Statute of the ICJ expressly entitles judges in the minority to deliver
dissenting opinions, 178  and this right has been exercised frequently not only in judgments, but also in connection with
procedural orders, advisory opinions, and interim proceedings.
9. 132
When arbitrators dissent in international arbitrations, they often simply refuse to sign the award. Where this is done, the
dissenting opinion may be annexed to the award if the other arbitrators agree, or it may be delivered to the parties separately.
In either case, the dissenting opinion does not form part of the award itself: it is not an ‘award’, but an opinion. 179
(iii) Position in national laws
9. 133
While modern arbitration legislation tends not to refer expressly to dissenting opinions, many such laws permit such opinions.
For example, although there is no mention of dissenting opinions in the Swiss PIL, a commentator states that an arbitrator

Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
has the right to give reasons for his dissent. 180  Similarly, section 52(3) of the English Arbitration Act 1996 provides that
the award shall be signed by all the arbitrators or all those assenting to the award, thus envisaging the possibility that an
arbitrator might dissent. 181  The Netherlands Arbitration Act 2015 provides that if ‘a minority of the arbitrators refuse to
sign [the award], the other arbitrators shall make mention thereof in the award signed by them’, similarly envisaging both
the possibility that an arbitrator may dissent, and confirming that such dissent will not form part of the award. 182  In France,
it is sometimes said that the principle of the secrecy of the deliberations is such that even to disclose that the decision was
unanimous is a breach of secrecy. 183  On the face of it, such an approach is not favourable to dissenting opinions, yet such
opinions are given in international arbitration, even in France. No prohibition against dissenting opinions is known in the
common law countries. Indeed, it is not unusual for common law arbitrators to consider themselves under a duty to inform
the tribunal and the parties of their reasons for any dissent.
(iv) Position under institutional rules
9. 134
ICSID is alone amongst the leading arbitral institutions in expressly recognising in its Rules the right of an arbitrator to
issue an individual opinion and, in particular, a dissenting opinion: ‘Any member of the Tribunal may attach his individual
opinion to the award, whether he dissents from the majority or not, or a statement of his dissent.’ 184  The LCIA Rules do not
mention dissenting opinions, although, as already stated, the right of an arbitrator to issue a dissenting opinion is recognised
in England 185  and it may be assumed that the draftsmen considered that no express provision was necessary. Nor do the
ICDR or ICC Rules contain any provision relating to dissenting opinions.
9. 135
The way in which dissenting opinions are handled in ICC arbitrations is unique because of the provisions of the ICC Rules
relating to scrutiny of awards. 186  At one time, the ICC discouraged the submission of dissenting opinions, but in 1985 a
working party was set up to consider dissenting opinions, and its final report was adopted in 1988. 187  The report did not
rule out dissenting opinions; instead, it suggested that the only circumstances in which a dissenting opinion should not be
sent to the parties with the award was where it is prohibited by law, or where the validity of the award might be imperilled,
either in the place of arbitration or (to the extent that this could be foreseen) in the country of enforcement. The ICC has
issued guidelines to its staff that reflect the conclusions of the working group and, in practice, dissenting opinions are sent out
by the ICC with the majority award (where applicable). (The ICC regularly issues statistics which, in relation to dissenting
opinions, usually reveal that almost all dissenting opinions are given by party-appointed arbitrators in favour of the party
that appointed them.) 188
(v) Practice at the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal
9. 136
Separate and dissenting opinions were submitted by both the Iranian and US arbitrators in many reported cases. In one of
these, the dissenting arbitrator went too far, when the dissenting judge indicated that the other two arbitrators had agreed with
one of his views in deliberations. 189  In another case, problems were caused when the dissenting opinion was issued after the
majority decision was published and contained allegations of procedural misconduct on the part of the majority arbitrators. 190
The majority arbitrators felt compelled to file an additional opinion, whereupon the dissenting arbitrator continued the process
by issuing yet another opinion. This was, in turn, followed by a second additional opinion by the chairman, who, whilst
stating that he would make no further response, indicated that he considered this exceptional procedure to be necessary to
vindicate the integrity of the tribunal and its staff, and to answer allegations that were factually incorrect. Acrimonious trading
of allegations and insults could go on indefinitely, and it is clearly desirable that the arbitrators should disclose their concerns
to each other in an exchange of draft opinions before the formal issue of the majority award and the dissenting opinion.

Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
(vi) When and how should dissenting opinions be given in international arbitrations?
9. 137
As already indicated, there is no tradition of dissenting opinions in civil law systems. 191  Dissenting opinions have come
to international arbitration from the common law tradition and it is a disputed question whether they have added value to
the arbitral process. 192  The traditional justification for dissenting opinions in common law judicial systems is that they may
contribute to the development of the law. Although rare, there are examples of higher courts adopting dissenting opinions
rather than the judgment of the majority. It might well be said—particularly by common lawyers—that if dissenting opinions
can contribute in this way to a national judicial system of justice, why might they not also contribute to the system of
international arbitration? To this, there are at least three responses.
9. 138
First, in most cases, there is no appeal from the award of an arbitral tribunal and, moreover, there exists no system of stare
decisis in international arbitration. A dissenting opinion cannot therefore inform an appellate arbitral jurisdiction nor will it
guide future arbitral tribunals searching for the wisdom of precedent. Dissenting opinions therefore have far less to contribute
to the arbitral process than to a common law judicial system. (An exception to this may arise in investment arbitrations where
the dissenting opinion may become public and influence later decisions, as sometimes happens with dissents in judgments
of the law courts.) 193
9. 139
Secondly, rather than contribute to the arbitral process, dissenting opinions may endanger its efficacy by threatening the
validity and enforceability of the award. It might be argued, in response to this concern, that if an award is flawed, then a
dissenting arbitrator has a right, and perhaps even a duty, to provide ammunition that may assist the losing party in challenging
the award. However, such an argument ignores the very purpose of an arbitration, which is to arrive at a decision, not a debate.
It is the decision that matters, and it matters not as a guide to the opinions of a particular arbitrator or as an indication of the
future development of the law, but because it resolves the particular dispute that divides the parties, in the manner chosen by
the parties, even if one of the arbitrators believes that decision to be wrong.
9. 140
The third and final reason follows from the different way in which arbitrators—as opposed to judges—are appointed. Judges
are appointed by the state. They do not depend in any way on the parties who appear before them. In an international
arbitration, by contrast, two of the three members of the tribunal will usually have been appointed (or nominated) by the
parties. When a dissenting arbitrator disagrees with the majority, and does so in terms that favour the party that appointed
him or her, it may cause some concern. Does the dissent arise from an honest difference of opinion, or is it influenced by a
desire to keep favour with the party that appointed the dissenting arbitrator? As one commentator has said:
Certain arbitrators, so as not to lose the confidence of the company or the state which appointed them, will
be tempted, if they have not put their point of view successfully in the course of the tribunal’s deliberation,
systematically to draw up a dissenting opinion and to insist that it be communicated to the parties. 194
Other authors concur:
Although party-appointed arbitrators are supposed to be impartial and independent in international arbitrations,
some believe that with the availability of dissent, arbitrators may feel pressure to support the party that appointed
them and to disclose that support. 195
Footnotes

Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
149
See, e.g., Reed, ‘Chapter 6: Arbitral decision-making: Art, science or sport? (Sixth Kaplan Lecture, December 3, 2012)’,
in Hong Kong International Arbitration Centre (ed) International Arbitration: Issues, Perspectives and Practice: Liber
Amicorum Neil Kaplan (Kluwer Law International, 2018), pp. 161–174.
150
Bingham, The Business of Judging (Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 4.
151
Fortier, ‘The tribunal’s deliberations’, in Newman and Hill (eds) The Leading Arbitrators’ Guide to International
Arbitration (2nd edn, Juris, 2008), pp. 479-480.
152
French Civil Code, Art. 1479, states: ‘Les délibérations du tribunal arbitral sont secretes.’
153
French Civil Code, Art. 1468, states: ‘Le tribunal arbitral fixe la date à laquelle le délibéré sera prononcé. Au cours du
délibéré, aucune demande ne peut être formée, aucun moyen soulevé et aucune pièce produite, si ce n’est à la demande
du tribunal arbitral.’
154
Bredin, ‘Le secret du délibéré arbitral’, in Études Offertes à Pierre Bellet (Litec, 1991). See also Savage and Gaillard
(eds) Fouchard, Gaillard, Goldman on International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer, 1999), para. 1369 (where proper
deliberations are considered ‘a requirement of international procedural public policy’).
155
De Boisséson, Le Droit Français de l’Arbitrage National et International (Joly, 1990), p. 296. See also the comment in
Robert, L’Arbitrage: Droit Interne, Droit International Privé (5th edn, Dalloz, 1983), para. 360 (authors’ translation):
‘Although it is practised according to a certain number of foreign laws, notably Anglo-Saxon, the dissenting opinion
is prohibited in French domestic law since it violates the secrecy of the tribunal’s deliberation [ … ]. ’ Under German
law, unless provided otherwise by the arbitration agreement, deliberations are also secret: see Münchener Kommentar
zur Zivilprozessordnung: ZPO, § 1052 Rn 1-5. In France, there may be limited exceptions to the general rule (e.g., in
the context of allegations of fraud or corruption). For example, in the Tapie case the French courts did have regard to
communications between a party, its appointee on the tribunal, and the tribunal president, in order to establish whether the
deliberative process was free of external influence (see Arrêt No. 842 du 18 mai 2017 (15-2.683, 16-10.339, 16-10.344),
Cass Comm, 18 May 2017).
156
Czech Republic v CME Czech Republic BV, Case No. T 8735-01,Svea Court of Appeal, IIC 63 (2003). An English
translation of the judgment can be found online at http://italaw.com/sites/default/files/case-documents/ita0182.pdf; a
case summary is available at [2003] Stockholm Arb Rep 167.
157
Czech Republic v CME Czech Republic BV, in the English translation, at 87; in the case summary, at 180.
158
See Gaillard and Savage (eds) Fouchard, Gaillard, and Goldman on International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law
International, 1999), para. 1374.
159
Sir Robert Jennings, Decision of 7 May 2001, at 7. A summary of the decision was published at (2001) 16 Mealey’s Int
Arb Rep 2. The full text is available for purchase from Mealey’s online.
160
Economy Forms Corporation v Islamic Republic of Iran, Award, Case No. 55-165-1, 13 June 1983, quoted in Schwebel,
‘The majority vote of an arbitral tribunal’ (1991) 2 Am Rev Intl Arb 402, at 409.
161
Mosk and Ginsburg, Dissenting Opinions in International Arbitration (Liber Amicorum Bengt Broms, 1999), p. 275.
162
See Chapter 5, paragraphs 5.77–5.85. In England, a party-appointed arbitrator is expected to come up to the same high
standards of fairness and impartiality as the person chairing the tribunal (see Halliburton v Chubb [2020] UKSC 48,
at 63).
163
Indeed, this is a material part of the duties of party-nominated arbitrators. A party-nominated arbitrator should do his
or her best to ensure that he or she understands the case being put forward by the party that nominated him or her
and should seek to make sure that the arbitral tribunal as a whole is in the same position. It is, of course, necessary
for party-nominated arbitrators to consider carefully the merits of the arguments on both sides and not to be seen as
favouring appointing parties. For concerns about partisanship amongst party-appointed arbitrators, see Paulsson, ‘Moral
hazard in international dispute resolution’ (2010) 25 ICSID Review, Foreign Investment Law Journal 339 and van
den Berg ‘Dissenting opinions by party-appointed arbitrators in investment arbitration’, in Mahnoush Arsanjani et al.
(eds) Looking to the Future: Essays on International Law in Honor of W Michael Reisman (Brill Academic, 2010),
p. 821. In contrast, for a defence of party-appointed arbitrators, see Brower and Rosenberg, ‘The death of the two-
headed nightingale: Why the Paulsson-van den Berg presumption that party-appointed arbitrators are untrustworthy
is wrongheaded’ (2013) Arb Intl 29(1) 7–44.
164
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 11.
166
See, e.g., LCIA Rules, Art. 26.5.
167
(1977) II YBCA 172, at 194.
168
Ibid., at 208.
169
Parties may of course consider modifying Art. 33(1) in order to remove the majority requirement in the event of a
deadlock (see UNCITRAL Report of 51st Session, 10 November 2009, UN Doc A/CN.9/684, para. 61 (‘the Working
Group emphasized that the parties had the ability in such situations to agree to another method of decision-making’)).

Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
170
ICC Rules, Art. 32.1. In such a case, the presiding arbitrator’s role is very similar, but not identical, to that of an umpire.
The difference is that an umpire is not required to make a decision unless and until the arbitrators appointed by the
parties disagree. If they disagree, they take no further part in the proceedings and the umpire proceeds as if he or she
were sole arbitrator.
171
LCIA Rules, Art. 26.5; Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, s. 189; English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 20(3)-(4); Swiss Rules, Art. 31.1. In
the authors’ experience, president-only awards are a rare occurrence. One reported example is the RAKTA case under
the 1955 ICC Rules (see ICC Case No. 1703/1971, summarised in Craig, Park, and Paulsson, International Chamber of
Commerce Arbitration (3rd edn, Oceana Publications, 2000), p. 370).
172
LCIA Rules, Art. 26.5.
173
ICSID Convention, Art. 48(1).
174
ICSID Convention, Art. 42(2). If it is not possible to form a majority, the proper course is for the arbitrators to resign
and for a replacement tribunal to be appointed. For an example in which this occurred, see Tokios Tokeles v Ukraine,
ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Decision on Jurisdiction, 29 April 2004.
175
Note D to Arbitration Rule 47 of 1968, (1968) 1 ICSID Reports 108.
176
The ICJ Statute, Art. 57 is generally interpreted as permitting the practice of giving separate opinions: see Born,
International Commercial Arbitration (2nd edn, Kluwer Law International, 2014), pp. 3052-3053.
177
Alabama Claims of the United States of America against Great Britain, Award rendered on 14 September 1872 by the
Tribunal of Arbitration established by Article I of the Treaty of Washington of 8 May 1871. For a discussion of the
proceedings, see Cushing, The Treaty of Washington: Its Negotiation, Execution, and the Discussions Relating Thereto
(Harper & Bros, 1873). See also Bingham, Lives of the Law (Oxford University Press, 2011), ‘The Alabama Claims
and the International Rule of Law’.
178
ICJ Statute, Art. 57.
179
See, e.g., Redfern, ‘Dissenting opinions in international commercial arbitration: The good, the bad and the ugly’ (2004)
20 Arb Intl 223, at 236, arguing that dissenting opinions are unwelcome in international commercial arbitration, because:
‘It is the decision which matters; and it matters not as a guide to the opinions of a particular arbitrator, or as an indication
of the future development of the law, but because it resolves the particular dispute that divides the parties; and it resolves
that dispute as part of a private, not public, dispute resolution process that the parties themselves have chosen.’
180
Blessing, ‘The new International Arbitration Law in Switzerland’ (1988) 5 J Intl Arb 9, at 66.
181
Other laws are more explicit. For example, the Brazilian Arbitration Act provides that ‘[A] dissenting arbitrator may,
if he so wishes, render a separate decision’ (Art. 24(2)).
182
Netherlands Arbitration Act 2015, Art. 1057(3). See also Sanders and van den Berg, The Netherlands Arbitration Act
1986 (Kluwer Law and Taxation, 1987), p. 33.
183
Cass. Soc. 9 November 1945, Gaz. Pal. 1946 1.22. Note, however, Professor Bredin’s comment that legal opinion on this
point seems to be divided: Bredin, ‘Le secret du délibéré arbitral’, in Études Offertes à Pierre Bellet (Litec, 1991), p. 71.
184
ICSID Rules, r. 47(3); ICSID Convention, Art. 48(4).
185
See, e.g., Bank Mellat v GAA Development Construction Co. [1988] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 44, per Steyn J, (1990) XV YBCA 521.
186
Discussed further in paragraph 9.201. The ICC Rules, Art. 34 provides that no award shall be rendered by the arbitral
tribunal until it has been approved by the ICC Court.
187
ICC, Final Report of the Working Party on Dissenting Opinions (1991) 2 ICC International Court of Arbitration Bulletin
32.
188
For arbitrations involving dissenting opinions, an ICC Court member will generally draft a report with recommendations
on the draft dissenting opinion during the scrutiny process (see ICC Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals, 1 January
2021, at 163). (For a discussion on dissenting opinions and party-appointed arbitrators, see Chapter 1, paragraphs 1.53–
1.55 and footnotes.)
189
Decision of 7 May 2001, at 7.
190
Grainger Associates v Islamic Republic of Iran (1987) 16 Iran–US CTR 317.
191
Lévy, ‘Dissenting opinions in international arbitration in Switzerland’ (1989) 5 Arb Intl 35, at 35.
192
This question was answered in the negative in Alan Redfern’s 2003 Freshfields Lecture: see Redfern, ‘Dissenting
opinions in international commercial arbitration: The good, the bad and the ugly’ (2004) 20 Arb Intl 223. It would be
right to say that the lecture itself gave rise to much dissent, as indicated in paragraphs 1.53–1.55 of this book.
193
The ICSID Rules, r. 46, defines an award to include any individual or dissenting opinions, and so make dissent something
that is expressly permitted.
194
De Boisséson, Le Droit Français de l’Arbitrage National et International (Joly, 1990), p. 802 (author’s translation).
195
Mosk and Ginsburg, Dissenting Opinions in International Arbitration (Liber Amicorum Bengt Broms, 1999), p. 275. See
also De Boisséson, Le Droit Français de l’Arbitrage National et International (Joly, 1990), p. 802. For an analysis of the

Section D. - Deliberations and Decisions of the Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638659...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
perceived problems with dissenting opinions in the investment treaty context, see Van den Berg, ‘Dissenting opinions by
party-appointed arbitrators in investment arbitration’, in Mahnoush Arsanjani et al. (eds) Looking to the Future: Essays
on International Law in Honor of W Michael Reisman (Brill Academic, 2010), p. 821.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
