Section B. - Expedited Procedures, UKBC-REDFERN 530638637 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section B. - Expedited Procedures
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 6 - Conduct of the Proceedings
Section B. - Expedited Procedures
(a) Introduction
6. 25
However, before turning to the various procedural steps that are normally followed in an international arbitration, we give brief
consideration to the procedural options available for expedited determinations. 24
6. 26
Expedited dispute resolution processes are not a recent development. Nevertheless, in recent years, there has been a growing
sense of frustration amongst businessmen involved in international commerce, because of the expense and delays involved
in reaching the promised land of the arbitral tribunal’s award. Some of the many solutions that are often put forward deserve
mention. 25
(b) Expedited formation
(i) Emergency arbitrator procedures
6. 27
As described in more detail in Chapter 4, ‘emergency arbitrator’ procedures have become a common feature of the main
institutional arbitration rules. 26  These procedures provide parties with a means of obtaining interim relief from an emergency
arbitrator appointed on an expedited basis (usually within one or two business days) prior to the constitution of the arbitral
tribunal, providing an alternative to seeking relief before the national courts. Under some rules, an emergency arbitrator can
be appointed before the notice of arbitration is filed 27  and can hear applications ex parte. 28
(ii) Expedited formation of the arbitral tribunal
6. 28
The LCIA Rules provide that, in cases of exceptional urgency, a party may apply to the LCIA Court for the expedited
formation of an arbitral tribunal. 29  The application must be made in writing to the LCIA Court, with copies sent to all other
parties to the arbitration, and must set out the specific grounds for the exceptional urgency in the formation of the arbitral
tribunal. For obvious reasons, it is usually the claimant who requests expedited formation. 30
6. 29

Section B. - Expedited Procedures, UKBC-REDFERN 530638637 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
The LCIA Court has discretion to shorten the time limits for the formation of the arbitral tribunal. 31  There have been a few
cases in which the time limit has been ‘significantly abridged’ and at least one case in which a sole arbitrator was appointed
within forty-eight hours of receipt of the request for arbitration. 32
(c) Fast-track procedures
6. 30
Following the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, expedition can be achieved by the adoption of ‘fast-track’ procedures, either
by means of simplified procedures available under certain arbitral rules, or by the tribunal exercising its discretion to abridge
time limits. Several arbitral institutions have developed rules for the faster resolution of disputes by means of a simplified
procedure. 33  As might be expected, the rules differ from one institution to another, but the Swiss Rules serve as a good example
of how the procedure can work significantly to reduce the duration of an average arbitration. Under these Rules:
 
• a sole arbitrator is appointed, unless the arbitration agreement otherwise provides and the parties are unable to agree to
the appointment of a sole arbitrator;
 
• written pleadings are limited to a statement of case, a defence, and (if applicable) a counterclaim and reply;
 
• unless the parties agree to a documents-only arbitration, a single hearing is held for the examination of witnesses and
experts, and for oral argument; and
 
• the award is made within six months of the date of the transmittal of the file to the arbitral tribunal, which may state the
arbitrator’s reasons in summary form. 34
It is noteworthy that, while this procedure is mandatory for cases in which the total amount in dispute does not exceed CHF1
million, 35  it is available for disputes of a greater amount if the parties so agree. Such processes offer hope for parties who wish
to avoid the delay and cost involved in a traditional international arbitration process. 36
6. 31
A notable example of a fast-track arbitration under standard arbitral rules involved the fast world of Formula One (F1) motor
racing. 37  At the time that the dispute arose, the first grand prix of the season was traditionally held in Melbourne in March.
In preparation for the race, teams shipped their cars from Europe in mid-February. At the end of one season, in the mid-1990s,
one team fell into dispute with the Federation Internationale de l’Automobile (FIA), headquartered in Paris, which regulates the
F1 championship in accordance with a comprehensive set of rules. The team in question, which was sponsored by a tobacco
company, wished to paint one of its cars in the colours of one of its brands of cigarettes and the other, in the livery of another
of its brands. The FIA objected, on the grounds that the championship is a team event, and insisted that all cars from the same
team must be painted in identical livery. The constitution of the FIA, to which every team must sign up when entering the
championship, contained an ICC arbitration clause.
6. 32
By Christmas Eve in the year in question, it became apparent that a resolution of the dispute would not be achieved by
negotiation. The team and the FIA agreed that they would submit to a ‘fast-track’ ICC arbitration with a view to obtaining a final
decision by the end of January, so that the cars could be painted and shipped in time to reach Australia by the end of February.
6. 33
The F1 team filed a request for arbitration with the ICC between Christmas Day and New Year’s Eve. A three-member arbitral
tribunal was appointed on New Year’s Day. This tribunal circulated draft terms of reference on the same day, which all concerned
signed within two more days. A sequential exchange of ‘memoranda’, to which the parties attached the documents on which
they relied, then took place at seven-day intervals, followed by a simultaneous exchange of written witness statements within
a few more days. A handful of disputed document requests were resolved by prompt procedural orders from the tribunal and
an eight-hour witness hearing took place on the last Saturday of January. The tribunal deliberated on the Sunday, and sent its
final award to the ICC Court for scrutiny by fax and courier at lunchtime the next day (Monday), together with separate signed,
but undated, signature pages.

Section B. - Expedited Procedures, UKBC-REDFERN 530638637 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
6. 34
The award was approved at an emergency session of the ICC Court the same afternoon, and the decision was notified to the
parties by fax and overnight courier on the same day. The parties received the fully reasoned award on the last day of January,
one month precisely from the day on which the tribunal was appointed, and the cars were painted and shipped to Australia in
good time for the first grand prix race of the season. 38
6. 35
A Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) case provides an even faster example of fast-track arbitration. 39  In 2018, Mr Jeffrey
Zina (a Lebanese alpine skier) sued the Lebanon Olympic Committee for failing to select him to represent Lebanon at the
2018 Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang. Mr Zina filed his claim at 10.20 hours on 13 February 2018. The respondent and other
interested parties were notified of the claim at on the same day. At 13.24 the CAS Ad Hoc Division notified the parties of the
composition of the arbitral tribunal, and at 14.30, a hearing was scheduled for 08.00 on the following day. The respondent filed
its response to the claim at 20.45 on 13 February 2018, and filed translations of the exhibits on which it sought to rely at 02.45
on 14 February 2018. The hearing commenced at 08.00 on 14 February, with the applicant and two witnesses attending through
video-conference. On 14 February 2018 at 14.31 (twenty-eight hours after the institution of the proceedings), the tribunal issued
the operative part of its award. These cases demonstrate what can be achieved when all concerned agree that there is a need
for speed. 40
(d) Early, or summary, determinations
6. 36
An alternative to ‘fast-track’ procedures is early, or summary, determination. This involves the early determination of one or
more claims or defences, upon application by a party or on the tribunal’s own initiative, on the basis that the claim or defence
in question has no prospect of success. 41
6. 37
Although arbitration rules have always endowed arbitral tribunals with the broad procedural discretion that would accommodate
summary determination, the use of such procedures has been limited. 42  The reasons for such limited use range from reluctance
to determine a dispute too swiftly, given the absence of any right of appeal in international arbitration to a far less justified
fear of failing to ensure due process. Whether this reluctance is understandable or not, the net result is that the time it takes to
dispose of a meritless claim or defence in international arbitration is one way in which the process compares badly to litigation
in the courts, where early disposition is often readily available. As one experienced arbitrator asked a few years ago: ‘Why
should a party be allowed to pursue an utterly hopeless claim simply because they inserted an arbitration agreement in their
contract rather than providing for the jurisdiction of the national courts?’ 43  In the authors’ view, it should not. And reflecting
this growing recognition, an increasing number of arbitration rules now feature express procedures for summary determination.
6. 38
The ICSID Rules was the first set of arbitration rules to permit a party to raise a preliminary objection that a claim was ‘manifestly
without legal merit’. 44  Other institutions have followed suit, and have expressly provided for summary determination of claims
and defences. These institutions include the ICC, 45  LCIA, 46  SIAC, 47  and SCC. For example, Rule 29 of the SIAC Rules
provides:
29.1 A party may apply to the Tribunal for the early dismissal of a claim or defence on the basis that:
 
a. a claim or defence is manifestly without legal merit; or
 
b. a claim or defence is manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
29.2 An application for the early dismissal of a claim or defence under Rule 29.1 shall state in detail the facts
and legal basis supporting the application. The party applying for early dismissal shall, at the same time as it

Section B. - Expedited Procedures, UKBC-REDFERN 530638637 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
files the application with the Tribunal, send a copy of the application to the other party, and shall notify the
Tribunal that it has done so, specifying the mode of service employed and the date of service.
6. 39
In the absence of specific provisions authorising summary disposition (or an express agreement by the parties), the use of
summary procedures is sometimes thought to run the risk of a claim at the enforcement stage of proceedings that there was a
lack of due process. 48  It might be argued that such procedures are inconsistent with the requirement to provide a party with
a ‘reasonable’ opportunity to be heard? While such an argument is perhaps understandable, a summary procedure should not
prejudice the ‘reasonable’ opportunity to be heard. Due process is not a ‘one-way street’: and summary procedures may, in
the right circumstances, be entirely consistent with an arbitral tribunal’s duty to adopt procedures that avoid unnecessary delay
or expense.
Footnotes
24
Brief procedures were, for instance, known in Venice between the twelfth and sixteenth centuries, in which
decisions were rendered within very short time frames. Marrella and Mozzato, Alle origini dell’arbitrato commerciale
internazionale: L’arbitrato a Venezia tra Medioevo ed età moderna (CEDAM, 2001).
25
The debate that followed also gave birth to the notion of ‘fast-track’ arbitration. The aim of such processes is to accelerate
all of the steps, thereby achieving a binding result as quickly as possible, reducing overall costs, and encouraging
settlements.
26
ICC Rules, Art. 29 and Appendix V; ICDR Rules, Art. 7; Swiss Rules, Art. 43; SCC Rules, Appendix II; HKIAC Rules,
Sch. 4; SIAC Rules, Sch. 1; LCIA Rules, Art. 9B. Since 1990, the ICC has offered the option to parties to expressly
adopt the Pre-Arbitral Referee Rules, which provide for the immediate appointment of a pre-arbitral referee empowered
to make certain interim orders prior to the constitution of the arbitral tribunal. However, the Rules have rarely been
used, primarily because they require parties to opt in, and are now rendered practically obsolete by the introduction
of the emergency arbitrator provisions in Art. 29 and Appendix V of the ICC Rules, which apply unless the parties
expressly opt out.
27
See, e.g., the ICC, SCC, SIAC, and Swiss Rules.
28
Swiss Rules, Art. 29.3.
29
LCIA Rules, Art. 9A (‘Expedited Formation of Arbitral Tribunal’) provides:
9.1
In exceptional urgency, any party may apply for the emergency formation of the Arbitral
Tribunal by the LCIA Court under Article 5.
9.2
Such an application shall be made to the Registrar in writing by electronic means, together
with a copy of the Request (if made by a Claimant) or a copy of the Response (if made by a
Respondent), and shall be delivered or notified forthwith to all other parties to the arbitration.
The application shall set out the specific grounds for exceptional urgency in the formation of
the Arbitral Tribunal.

Section B. - Expedited Procedures, UKBC-REDFERN 530638637 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
9.3
The LCIA Court shall determine the application as expeditiously as possible in the
circumstances. If the application is granted, for the purpose of forming the Arbitral Tribunal the
LCIA Court may set or abridge any period of time under the Arbitration Agreement or other
agreement of the parties (pursuant to Article 22.5).
30
Turner and Mohtashami, Guide to the LCIA Arbitration Rules (Oxford University Press, 2009), paras 4.86 ff. See
Chapter 4 for fuller discussion of the establishment of the arbitral tribunal.
31
LCIA Rules, Art. 22.5.
32
Information provided by the LCIA’s Registrar.
33
These include the ICC, AAA, SIAC, CIETAC, HKIAC, WIPO, SCC, and the Swiss Arbitration Centre. See, e.g., ICC
Rules, Art. 30 and Appendix VI, AAA Rules, Expedited Procedures, Sections E-1–E-10; see also the ICDR Arbitration
Model Clause for Expedited Cases; SIAC Rules, r. 5; CIETAC Rules, Ch. IV (titled ‘Summary Procedure’); HKIAC
Rules, Art. 42; WIPO Expedited Arbitration Rules; SCC Rules for Expedited Arbitrations; Swiss Rules, Art. 42.
34
Swiss Rules, Art. 42.
35
Swiss Rules, Art. 9.4.
36
The Swiss Federal Supreme Court ruled on a challenge to an award rendered in accordance with the Swiss Arbitration
Centre’s expedited procedure and held, in the circumstances, that the respondent had not been denied its right to be heard
nor had it been treated unequally: Decision No. 4A_294/2008, Swiss Federal Supreme Court, 28 October 2008.
37
ICC Case No. 10211. None of the material published in this book is confidential, because the proceedings and the
procedure were fully reported in various motor racing journals. See also Kaufmann-Kohler and Peter, ‘Formula 1 racing
and arbitration: The FIA tailor-made system for fast track dispute resolution’ (2001) 17 Arb Intl 173.
38
As a postscript, one of authors, who was a member of the tribunal (which unanimously upheld the FIA’s position), recalls
one of the other arbitrators during the deliberation making the observation: ‘Of course, you know what they [the F1
team] will do [ … ] they’ll paint each car the same, one side of the car in the livery of one brand and the other side in
the livery of the other brand.’ His instinct served him well: this is precisely what the team did.
39
CAS, Ad Hoc Division, XXIII Olympic Winter Games in Pyeongchang, CAS OG 18/06 Jeffrey Zina v Lebanese Olympic
Committee, Award, 15 February 2018.
40
See also Rawding, Fullelove, and Martin, ‘International arbitration in England: A procedural overview’, in Greenaway,
Fullelove, Lew, and Bor (eds) Arbitration in England, with Chapters on Scotland and Ireland (Kluwer Law International,
2013), p. 361, at paras 18-34–18-38.
41
Gill, ‘Applications for the early disposition of claims in arbitration proceedings’ (2009) 14 ICCA Congress Series
513. National court procedures often permit a court to make a summary judgment where a plaintiff or a defendant
has no reasonable prospects of succeeding on its claim or defence. However, as Gill points out, ‘it is uncontroversial
to suggest that tribunals generally do not possess the powers of summary disposition conferred on national courts’:
ibid., at 515. See also the Centre for Public Resources (CPR) International Committee on Arbitration, Guidelines
on Early Disposition of Issues in Arbitration, available online at http://www.cpradr.org/RulesCaseServices/CPRRules/
GuidelinesonEarlyDispositionofIssuesinArbitration.aspx.
42
Gill, ‘Applications for the early disposition of claims in arbitration proceedings’ (2009) 14 ICCA Congress Series 513,
at 523.
43
Ibid., at 520.
44
See 2006 ICSID Rules, r. 41.5. ICSID Rule 41.3 provides that: ‘If the Tribunal decides that all claims are manifestly
without legal merit, it shall render an Award to that effect.’ See also AAA Rules, Art. 33. More generally, IBA Rules,
Art. 2.3, encourages the arbitral tribunal ‘to identify to the Parties, as soon as it considers it to be appropriate, any
issues: [ … ] (b) for which a preliminary determination may be appropriate’. See also 1999 IBA Working Party and 2010
IBA Rules of Evidence Review Subcommittee, ‘Commentary on the Revised Text of the 2010 IBA Rules on the Taking
of Evidence in International Arbitration’ (2011) 5(1) DRI 45, at 51: ‘While the 1999 Working Party did not want to
encourage litigation-style motion practice, the Working Party recognised that in some cases certain issues may resolve
all or part of a case.’
45
The ICC’s Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration
(ICC Practice Note) makes clear that ‘an application for the expeditious determination of manifestly unmeritorious
claims or defences may be addressed within the broad scope of Article 22.’

Section B. - Expedited Procedures, UKBC-REDFERN 530638637 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
46
LCIA Rules, Art. 22.1.viii.
47
SIAC Rules, r. 29 (Early dismissal of Claims and Defenses).
48
Born and Beale, ‘Party autonomy and default rules: Reframing the debate over summary disposition in international
arbitration’ (2010) 21 ICC International Court of Arbitration Bulletin 19.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
