Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section C. - Remedies
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 9 - Award
Section C. - Remedies
9. 41
The arbitral tribunal’s power to grant appropriate relief is based on the arbitration agreement and on the relevant applicable law.
While in principle an arbitration agreement could specify the remedial measures to be conferred upon the tribunal, the usual
position is that the agreement is silent on that point. In such circumstances, the tribunal must look into the relevant arbitration
rules or the applicable law. Arbitration awards may cover a range of remedies, including:
 
•monetary compensation;
 
•punitive damages and other penalties;
 
•specific performance and restitution;
 
•injunctions;
 
•declaratory relief;
 
•rectification;
 
•filling gaps and adaptation of contracts;
 
•interest; and
 
•costs.
(a) Monetary compensation
9. 42
The type of award most often made by an international arbitral tribunal is one that directs the payment of a sum of money by one
party to the other. This payment may represent money due under a contract (debt), or compensation (damages) for loss suffered,
or both. The sum of money awarded is usually expressed in the currency of the contract or the currency of the loss. In large
transnational projects, however, it is not unusual for reference to be made to several different currencies—so that, for example,
plant and equipment manufactured or purchased overseas may be paid for in US dollars, whilst labour, plant, and equipment
made or purchased locally may be paid for in the local currency. In such cases, unless the parties agree, the arbitral tribunal
must receive submissions and decide on the currency or currencies in which the award is to be made.
9. 43
Under many national arbitration laws, arbitral tribunals have discretion to make awards in any currency deemed appropriate. The
Lesotho Highlands case is illustrative of both the exercise of such discretion and the potential consequences of doing so. The case
concerned the construction of a dam in Lesotho by a consortium of foreign companies. The consortium claimed amounts that,
had they been paid when due, would have been payable in Lesotho loti, as owed under the relevant contract. However, by the
time the award was made, the value of the loti had diminished against international currency values. The consortium therefore
claimed payment of the award in four European currencies contractually designated as currencies for non-loti payments. In
rendering the award in the currencies requested, the arbitral tribunal invoked section 48 of the English Arbitration Act 1996,
which allows a tribunal to order payment of an award in any currency (unless agreed otherwise by the parties).

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
9. 44
The employer challenged the award in the English courts, under section 68(2)(b), for excess of power. 54  In so doing, the
employer contended that the provisions in the contract on currencies effectively excluded the tribunal’s power to select the
currency of the award. On appeal to the House of Lords, the employer’s challenge was dismissed by a majority of four to one. 55
Of the major institutional rules, the LCIA expressly permits an award to be expressed in any currency (unless the parties have
agreed otherwise). 56  The ICDR Rules go further in granting the tribunal power to issue a monetary award in a currency other
than that of the contract if it considers such alternative currency to be ‘more appropriate’. 57
(b) Punitive damages and other penalties
9. 45
Punitive damages are not awarded to compensate the wronged party, but instead to punish and deter the wrongdoer. In general,
punitive damages are an exceptional and extreme measure permitted only, for example, in cases of fraud and substantial
malice. 58  In the context of awarding punitive damages, it is tempting to think that an arbitral tribunal has precisely parallel
powers to those of a national court to award damages in accordance with the law applicable to the substantive merits of the
dispute. However, the powers of an arbitral tribunal are not necessarily the same as those of a court.
9. 46
An arbitral tribunal may, in certain respects, have wider powers than those of a judge, because the tribunal’s powers flow from,
inter alia, the arbitration agreement. Thus, in England, a court applying US law has no power to order the payment of triple
damages—a power provided under US antitrust legislation. 59  But an arbitral tribunal sitting in England does have the power to
award triple damages provided that the parties’ arbitration agreement is sufficiently wide to encompass the determination of US
antitrust law claims—although, for public policy reasons, there may be problems of enforcement, as will be discussed later. 60
9. 47
To determine the power of an arbitral tribunal to award a particular remedy, it is necessary to look at the law applicable to the
substance of the dispute, or the law of the seat of the arbitration, depending on the applicable conflict of laws rules applicable
(often determined by the seat). In civil law countries, for example, the concept of punitive damages is almost unknown, whether
in breach-of-contract cases or otherwise, with a limited exception in some countries where there has been a wilful intention to
harm the claimant amounting, in effect, to fraud. 61  Under French law, punitive damages are not recoverable, although ‘moral
damages’ (to reflect the tribunal’s disapproval) may be recoverable. Under English law, punitive damages may be awarded
only in actions in tort—and even then only in three categories of case. 62  Punitive damages may not be awarded for breach of
contract. 63  However, such claims are permissible in the United States, where statutes may provide expressly for the payment
of multiple damages by one party to the other. 64
9. 48
With regard to enforcement, the key question is whether an award of punitive damages would be enforceable under the New
York Convention in a country that does not itself recognise such a remedy. The ground for refusal of enforcement would be
Article V(2) of the Convention, which allows refusal of recognition or enforcement of an award if recognition or enforcement
would be contrary to public policy. For example, in a leading judgment rendered in Germany in 1992, the Federal Supreme
Court (Bundesgerichtshof) refused to enforce part of a US court decision that provided for the recovery of punitive damages,
on the grounds that such recovery was contrary to German public policy. 65  The authors are not aware of any German court
decisions relating to attempts to enforce a foreign arbitral award providing for the recovery of punitive damages, but the same
result is likely. 66
9. 49
In summary, it is suggested that arbitral tribunals should treat claims for punitive damages and other penalties with considerable
caution. They should address themselves to the threshold question as to whether or not they have the power to make such an

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
award, even if a claim for punitive damages is admissible under the law applicable to the substance of the dispute, by examining
both the lex arbitri and the scope of the arbitration agreement. 67  If the remedy is permissible, it then becomes a question of
enforcement, which is dealt with in Chapter 11.
9. 50
Problems concerning enforceability should be left for the courts at the place of enforcement. However, it is preferable for arbitral
tribunals to treat any award in respect of punitive damages or any other penalties as an entirely separate claim, in order to ensure
that the punitive portion of the award is severable in the event of a successful challenge in the courts at the place of enforcement.
(c) Specific performance
9. 51
An arbitral tribunal may be authorised by the parties or by the applicable law (either the substantive law or the lex arbitri,) to
order specific performance of a contract. An international arbitral tribunal sitting in the United States will have the power to
award specific performance, 68  and English law empowers an arbitral tribunal sitting in England ‘to order specific performance
of a contract (other than a contract relating to land)’ unless a contrary intention is expressed in the arbitration agreement. 69
In civil law jurisdictions, specific performance is a primary remedy for breach of contract. Orders of specific performance are
therefore not uncommon in international arbitration. 70
(d) Restitution
9. 52
Restitution seeks to put the aggrieved party in the same position as that in which it would have been had the wrongful act
not taken place. In common law terminology, it is a form of specific performance. By way of example, in England, unless the
parties otherwise agree, an arbitral tribunal has the same powers as an English court ‘to order a party to do or refrain from
doing anything’. 71
9. 53
An example of the use of this remedy in public international law is provided by the Temple of Preah-Vihear case, 72  in which
the International Court of Justice (ICJ) ordered the government of Thailand to restore to Cambodia certain sculptures and
other objects that it had removed from the temple on the border between the two countries. In 2003, the ICJ in its advisory
opinion about Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 73  held that Israel had an
obligation to return the ‘land, orchards, olive groves and other immovable property seized from any natural or legal person for
purposes of construction of the wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory’. 74  A further example in the investment treaty context
is Von Pezold v Zimbabwe, where the tribunal granted claimants restitution of certain properties expropriated by the state. 75
9. 54
Even in the field of public international law, however, the remedy is less common than monetary compensation:
The essential principle contained in the actual notion of an illegal act—a principle which seems to be established
by international practice and in particular by the decisions of arbitral tribunals—is that reparation must, as far
as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation which would, in all
probability, have existed if that act had not been committed. Restitution in kind, or, if this is not possible, payment
of a sum corresponding to the value which a restitution in kind would bear; the award, if need be, of damages for
loss sustained which would not be covered by restitution in kind or payment in place of it—such are the principles
which should serve to determine the amount of compensation due for an act contrary to international law. 76
9. 55

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
The relief sought and granted in the growing number of investment arbitrations confirms that, in practice, monetary
compensation, rather than restitution, is the principal remedy sought and granted in international arbitration. By way of example,
Article 1135 of Chapter 11 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) provides that although a tribunal may award
‘restitution of property’, such awards ‘shall provide that the disputing party may pay monetary damages and any applicable
interest in lieu of restitution’. Thus the host state of an investment that is condemned under a Chapter 11 arbitral award will
always have the right to pay damages in place of restitution.
9. 56
In Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Co. v Ecuador, 77  the tribunal refused to
grant an order that Ecuador fully reinstate the claimants’ rights under the relevant contracts. In an interim award dated 17 August
2007, 78  the tribunal refused to grant such relief partly on the basis that the claimants could not establish a right to an award
of specific performance of the contracts. The tribunal held that an order reinstating the claimants’ contract could be made only
if (a) it was not legally impossible to revive the contract, (b) such a remedy would not involve a disproportionate interference
with state sovereignty, as compared to an award of damages, and (c) damages could not otherwise make the claimants whole
for their losses. 79
(e) Injunctions
9. 57
There is no objection in principle to an arbitral tribunal granting relief by way of injunction, if requested to do so, either on
an interim basis or as final relief. Injunctive relief is addressed in detail in Chapter 7. For present purposes, it is sufficient to
state that an arbitral tribunal is not usually empowered to make effective orders against third parties, and if injunctive relief
against third parties is required, it is generally quicker and more effective to seek it directly from a national court. Most sets of
international and institutional rules make it clear that an arbitration clause is not to be taken as excluding the jurisdiction of the
relevant national court to make orders for interim measures of protection. 80  However, Article 26.3 of the UNCITRAL Rules,
for example, contains the qualification requiring that an applicant must satisfy the tribunal that:
[ … ]
 
(i) harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely to result if the measure is not
ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs the harm that is likely to result to the party
against whom the measure is directed if the measure is granted; and
 
(ii) there is a reasonable possibility that the requesting party will succeed on the merits of the
claim.
9. 58
In some jurisdictions, there was previously doubt as to whether the power of national courts to grant interim relief in support
of arbitration was limited to domestic seated arbitrations. For example, in India, following the Supreme Court’s 2012 decision
in Balco, 81  no application for interim relief under section 9 of the 1996 Indian Arbitration Act was available from Indian
courts in support of international arbitrations seated outside India. 82  However, following significant amendments to India’s
Arbitration Act in 2015, it is now clear that interim relief from Indian courts is available in respect of foreign seated ‘international
commercial arbitrations’ (subject to any agreement to the contrary). 83  A recent decision of the Supreme Court has clarified that
the phrase ‘international commercial arbitration’ in this context also captures an arbitration between two Indian parties with a
foreign seat (which was previously a somewhat vexed issue as a matter of Indian law). 84

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
(f) Declaratory relief
9. 59
An arbitral tribunal may be asked to make an award that is simply declaratory of the rights of the parties. Modern arbitration
legislation 85  often makes express provision for the granting of declaratory relief. Even when there is no such express provision,
however, there is no reason in principle why an arbitral tribunal should not grant such relief. Indeed, declaratory relief has
become a common remedy in international arbitration, with requests for contractual damages usually coupled with a request
for a declaration that there has been a breach of contract.
9. 60
The Aramco arbitration provides a classic example of an arbitration in which the parties only claimed declaratory relief. 86
Aramco claimed that its exclusive right to transport oil from its concession area in Saudi Arabia had been infringed by the
agreement made between the Saudi Arabian government and the late Aristotle Onassis, the Greek shipping magnate, and his
company, the Saudi Arabian Maritime Tankers Company. The dispute was significant—but neither party wished it to jeopardise
their trading relationship, which was a continuing relationship dating back many years. 87  Accordingly, it was agreed that the
dispute should be referred to an ad hoc tribunal of three arbitrators based in Geneva. It was further agreed that the award should
be of declaratory effect only, with neither of the parties claiming damages for any alleged injury. The arbitral tribunal said:
There is no objection whatsoever to Parties limiting the scope of the arbitration agreement to the question of what
exactly is their legal position. When the competence of the arbitrators is limited to such a statement of the law
and does not allow them to impose the execution of an obligation on either of the Parties, the Arbitration Tribunal
can only give a declaratory award. 88
9. 61
A declaratory award establishes the legal position definitively and has a binding effect as between the parties. It is a useful
device, particularly where the parties have a continuing relationship and want to resolve a dispute without the risk of damaging
that relationship by a demand for monetary compensation. In England, an award containing a negative declaration is capable
both of recognition and enforcement (depending on the terms of the order in question). 89
(g) Rectification
9. 62
Rectification essentially is a common law equitable remedy, and is virtually unknown in civil law countries, where it tends to be
treated in the same sense as adaptation of contracts and ‘filling gaps’. In common law countries, these concepts are considered
separately. However, in general, an arbitral tribunal may make an order for rectification of a contract if empowered to do so
by the parties.
9. 63
In England, any doubt about the position was resolved by the Arbitration Act 1996: an arbitral tribunal has the power ‘to order
the rectification, setting aside or cancellation of a deed or other document’, unless the parties agree otherwise. 90
(h) Filling gaps and adaptation of contracts
9. 64
An arbitral tribunal does not, in general, have power to create, or write, a contract between the parties. Its role in a contractual
dispute is usually to interpret the contract as signed by the parties. However, almost anything is possible by clear consent of

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
the parties. 91  In particular, it is now generally accepted that an arbitral tribunal has implied consent to ‘fill gaps’ by making a
determination as to the presumed intention of the parties in order to make a contract operable. In England, a relatively mature
authority for this proposition may be found in the famous ‘chickens’ case, 92  to which reference is still made from time to time
by the English courts.
9. 65
The principle was clarified and expanded in the later Mamidoil line of cases. In Mamidoil, 93  the English Court of Appeal stated:
[ … ]
 
(vi)Particularly in the case of contracts for future performance over a period, where the parties may desire
or need to leave matters to be adjusted in the working out of their contract, the courts will assist the parties
to do so, so as to preserve rather than destroy bargains, on the basis that what can be made certain is itself
certain. Certum est quod certum reddi potest.
[ … ]
 
(viii)For these purposes, an express stipulation for a reasonable fair measure or price will be a sufficient
criterion for the courts to act on. But even in the absence of express language, the courts are prepared to
imply an obligation in terms of what is reasonable.
[ … ]
 
(x)The presence of an arbitration clause may assist the courts to hold a contract to be sufficiently certain
or to be capable of being rendered so, as indicating a commercial and contractual mechanism which can be
operated with the assistance of experts in the field, by which the parties, in the absence of agreement, may
resolve their dispute.
9. 66
A similar position exists in civil law countries, where the courts appear to go directly to what they call the ‘intention of
the parties’, rather than use the ‘implied term’ device that is a feature of English contractual interpretation. In a note on
‘L’Interpretation Arbitrale’, 94  a distinguished Swiss commentator suggested that, in French law, the arbitrator takes account
of the commercial context in which an agreement is made—but if the parties have omitted an important provision from their
contract on a particular point, it is perhaps because they prefer to leave it open, rather than not to agree upon a contract at all.
9. 67
A more difficult question is whether or not an arbitral tribunal has power to change the unambiguous terms of a contract. This
is certainly possible where the relevant contract contains a provision authorising the arbitral tribunal to do so. Such provisions
are commonly found in long-term gas contracts. Many such contracts contain clauses that provide for price reviews. Indeed,
these have led to a whole wave of price review arbitrations in recent years, which have focused on often complex price review
formulae and that are heavy on economic expert evidence. 95
9. 68
A device once used was reliance on the so-called ‘hardship clause’. The 1978 ICC Rules for the Adaptation of Contracts, the
1994 Model Exploration and Production Sharing Agreement of Qatar and Principles 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 of the 2004 UNIDROIT
Principles of International Commercial Contracts 96  served as a ‘blueprint’ for such provisions. However, an express provision
in the relevant contract was required to bring them into operation and in practice ‘hardship clauses’ are rarely seen in modern
contracts. What happens instead is that commercial parties (or their lawyers) insert tailor-made price-review, ‘balancing’, or
‘economic equilibrium’ provisions in long-term supply contracts, so as to enable mediators and/or arbitral tribunals to adapt
their contracts when circumstances change in a manner that was unforeseen when the contract was signed. 97
9. 69

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
Occasionally, arbitral tribunals issue awards that have the effect of changing the express terms of a contract in which there is no
clear provision authorising them to do so. Where the applicable substantive law is that of a civil law jurisdiction, the justification
usually given is the application of the doctrine of rebus sic stantibus. In the common law world, the parties’ legal representatives
and arbitrators tend to place reliance on ‘implied terms’ to the effect that this is what the parties must have intended to happen
in the new circumstances that have arisen.
(i) Interest
9. 70
The payment of interest on a loan, or in respect of money that is paid later than it should have been, is a common feature of
modern business relationships, and the award of compensatory interest in international arbitration has likewise become routine.
Indeed, it has become rare for interest not to be awarded where an award provides for the payment of monies due. As one
international arbitrator has said:
In all international commercial arbitrations where a claim for the payment of money is advanced, whether debt
or damages, it is highly probable that the claimant has also suffered a financial loss resulting from late payment
of the principal amount. That loss can amount to a significant proportion of the total claim; and in certain cases,
it can exceed the principal amount. In a modern arbitration régime, it is unthinkable that a claimant should not
have the right to recover that loss in the form of interest. 98
9. 71
However, the situation is different in some Muslim countries—such as Saudi Arabia 99 —in which the law against usury (riba)
prevents the levying of interest:
The proposition of interest, strictly applied in Hanbali law (Saudi Arabia, Qatar) and Zayydi law (North Yemen)
is linked in the minds of Muslim lawyers and economists with the rejection of the idea of the homo economicus
as devised by the West, and with the integration of religious principles into the commercial life of the Muslim
businessman, while the businessman should be solvent he should also conform to Qur’anic teaching, for although
the Prophet did not condemn profit arising from sale or from a partnership he did prohibit the charging of interest
on a loan [ … ] 100
(i) Basis upon which interest can be awarded
9. 72
While the availability of interest in international arbitration is for the large part uncontroversial, the basis upon which interest
is awarded varies. Most institutional rules of arbitration do not contain express provisions for the payment of interest, largely
because it was assumed that an arbitral tribunal had the power to make an award in respect of interest, in just the same way as
it has the power to make an award in respect of any other claims submitted to it. 101  The right to interest will therefore flow
from the parties’ underlying contract (that is, from a contractual provision for the levying of interest for late payment), or by
virtue of the applicable law. 102  The laws that govern the power of a tribunal to award interest also vary. In some jurisdictions,
for example Bermuda, Hong Kong, England, and Scotland, the power to award interest is governed by the law of the place
of arbitration. 103  In others, for example under German conflict-of-laws rules, the liability to pay interest is a question of
substantive law and thus governed by the law of the contract. 104
(ii) How much interest to award
9. 73

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
More problematic in practice than the question of whether an arbitral tribunal can award interest in principle are questions
concerning the rate of interest to be awarded, from which start date, and in which currency. Most applicable laws leave these
questions to the tribunal’s discretion. Thus the English Arbitration Act 1996 empowers a tribunal seated in England to award
interest ‘from such dates, at such rates and with such rests as it considers meets the justice of the case’. 105  Similarly, the law
of Australia permits a tribunal to award interest ‘at such reasonable rate as the tribunal determines for the whole or any part
of the money, for the whole or any part of the period between the date on which the cause of action arose and the date on
which the award is made’, and thereafter ‘from the day of the making of the award or such later day as the tribunal specifies,
on so much of the money as is from time to time unpaid’. 106  Other jurisdictions, such as Hong Kong, India, and Singapore,
have also enacted laws that give arbitrators similar discretion in the award of interest. 107
9. 74
In exercising this discretion, the tribunal will typically invite submissions and evidence from the parties on these issues
in the same way as it would in respect of any other request for relief. Parties will thus usually have an opportunity to set
out their respective positions on the rate of interest to be applied, the period for which it should be applied, and whether a
different rate (such as a statutory legal interest rate) should be applied for the period following the rendering of an award until
payment. In making such submissions, parties would do well to make it as easy as possible for a tribunal to award interest
by providing the calculations upon which such an award would be based (for example, in any damages model prepared by
a party’s quantum expert). 108
(iii) Compound interest
9. 75
Most systems of national law expressly permit arbitral tribunals to award some form of interest on the amount awarded in
respect of a claim or counterclaim, whether the amount awarded is due under a contract or as compensation or as restitution.
However, whether there is a power to award compound (as opposed to simple) interest remains less clear. 109  Although the
Model Law does not contain any express provisions concerning interest, arbitration legislation in common law jurisdictions
such as England, Ireland, Hong Kong, and Bermuda give arbitral tribunals express power to award compound interest. Thus
section 49 of the English Arbitration Act 1996 provides that, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the tribunal may award
simple or compound interest. This is, however, by no means a feature of all common law jurisdictions: in Canada and the
United States, the power to award compound interest varies from state to state and province to province; in Australia and
New Zealand, the power to award compound interest is strictly limited.
9. 76
In civil law jurisdictions, arbitral tribunals typically have the power to award a statutory (or legal) rate of interest, which is
simple interest at a rate defined by statute. Like the common law, however, there are once again exceptions to the rule: the
Dutch and Japanese civil codes provide, for example, that statutory interest is automatically capitalised at the end of each
year. 110  An ICC arbitral tribunal in Geneva once awarded compound interest in a dispute between a state and a French entity
on the basis of trade usage under Article 13 of the ICC Rules. 111  Sources of international law are no clearer. Article 38 of the
International Law Commission’s Draft Articles on ‘Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts’ 112  provides
simply that ‘interest shall be payable on any principal sum when necessary in order to ensure full reparation’.
9. 77
Although the law on this issue varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, awards of compound interest appear to have become
more common. In the Santa Elena arbitration, 113  an international tribunal found that although simple interest seemed, at
that time, to be awarded more frequently than compound interest, ‘no uniform rule of law has emerged from the practice
in international arbitration as regards the determination of whether compound or simple interest is appropriate in any given
case’. 114  In Wena Hotels, 115  an ICSID tribunal went further and found that an award of compound interest is generally
appropriate in modern arbitration. In recent years, the approach in the Santa Elena and Wena Hotels arbitrations has been
followed by a large number of arbitral tribunals, such that the award of compound interest is no longer an exception. 116  In
fact, studies have shown that ICSID awards issued subsequent to Santa Elena have more often than not awarded compound
interest. 117

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
9. 78
The reason for this change is that, where the applicable law allows, international arbitral tribunals are reaching the same view
as that reached nearly 40 years ago by Judge Howard Holtzmann in his dissenting opinion in Starrett Housing Corporation v
Iran 118 —namely, that simple interest may not always, in the language of Article 38 of the Draft Articles on Responsibility
of States, ‘ensure full reparation of loss suffered’. As a leading academic in this field has observed:
[A]lmost all financing and investment vehicles involve compound interest [ … ] if the claimant could have
received compound interest merely by placing its money in a readily available and commonly used investment
vehicle, it is neither logical nor equitable to award the claimant only simple interest. 119
(iv) Enforcing awards that carry interest
9. 79
It has already been seen that an award of interest (whether simple or compound) may be prohibited by the relevant national
law. If this is the law of the arbitration agreement, or of the contract under which the dispute arose, it seems that an arbitral
tribunal has no option but to apply it. Where parties to a contract have chosen (or are deemed to have chosen) as the substantive
law of their agreement a law that prohibits the payment of interest, they can scarcely complain if interest is not payable.
9. 80
If the law of the place of arbitration (the lex arbitri) forbids the payment of interest, it may theoretically be possible for the
arbitral tribunal to disregard this local law and apply the substantive law of the contract. But if the provisions of the local
law are mandatory, there is a risk that the award could be attacked and rendered invalid under the law of the place where it
was made. It follows that an arbitral tribunal sitting, for example, in Saudi Arabia but applying French law as the substantive
law of the contract, should be cautious when considering an award in respect of interest, even though this is permitted by
the substantive law of the contract. Certainly, any award of interest should be clearly separated from the other parts of the
award. 120
9. 81
What of the law of the place of enforcement? At the time of the arbitration, it is hardly possible for an arbitral tribunal to do
more than make an informed guess as to the likely place of enforcement of its eventual award—and even this will be difficult
until the arbitral tribunal has formed a view as to which party is likely to win the arbitration. It is suggested that, in deciding
whether or not to award interest, an arbitral tribunal cannot be expected to take into account the likely consequences of such
an award in a potential place of enforcement unless the point is expressly brought to its attention by one or both of the parties,
in which case the point would have to be considered.
(v) Post-award interest
9. 82
In general, it is also open to arbitrators to set a rate of post-award interest at any reasonable percentage that they deem
appropriate. 121  This is often the rate that would apply to a judgment in the country in which the award is made. But, in
modern practice, arbitral tribunals often decline to distinguish between pre- and post-award interest; instead, arbitral tribunals
often award a single rate of interest to run for the whole period from a certain date (which may include the date of the breach,
or the date on which the loss was suffered, or the date of the request for arbitration, depending on the applicable law and on the
way in which the arbitral tribunal decides to exercise any discretion available to it) up to the date of payment of the award. 122
9. 83
In some instances, once an arbitral award is enforced in a particular country as a judgment of a court, the post-award
interest rate may be replaced by the rate applicable to civil judgments. 123  In England, however, section 49(3) of the English
Arbitration Act 1996 permits the arbitral tribunal to exercise its discretion to award interest up to the date of payment.

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
(j) Costs
9. 84
A claim in respect of the costs incurred by a party in connection with an international arbitration is, in principle, no different
from any other claim, except that it is not usually quantified until the end of the arbitral proceedings.
9. 85
Given the growing scale and costs of many international arbitrations, it is not surprising that the allocation of costs as between
the parties is an increasingly important feature of any proceeding.
9. 86
The world’s major arbitral institutions generally distinguish between the ‘costs of the arbitration’ and ‘costs of the parties’.
These are broad summaries of the terminology used in the UNCITRAL Rules, 124  the ICC Rules, 125  the ICDR Rules, 126  SCC
Rules, 127  the Rules of the SIAC, 128  and the LCIA Rules. 129  However, as in the previous edition of this book, this section
addresses three separate categories for the purpose of discussing claims in respect of costs:
 
•‘costs of the tribunal’ (that is, the fees and expenses of the tribunal);
 
•‘costs of the arbitration’ (including the charges for administration of the arbitration by an arbitral institution, the hiring of
hearing rooms, interpreters and transcript preparation, amongst other things); and
 
•‘costs of the parties’ (including the costs of legal representation, expert witnesses, witness and other travel-related
expenditure, amongst other things).
Each of these categories is now considered in turn.
(i) Costs of the tribunal
9. 87
The costs of the tribunal usually include not only the fees, and travel-related and other expenses, payable to the individual
members of the arbitral tribunal itself, but also any directly related expenses, such as the fees and expenses of any experts
appointed by the arbitral tribunal. Also included in the tribunal costs are the fees and expenses of any administrative secretary
or registrar, 130  and any other incidental expenses incurred by the arbitral tribunal for the account of the case. In institutional
arbitration, the costs of the tribunal are usually fixed or approved by the relevant institution pursuant to its rules. Some
institutions, as already stated, adopt an ad valorem system of remuneration; others adopt a time/cost system, with an hourly
rate that will be fixed by the institution, and will usually be subject to an upper limit. The UNCITRAL Rules require
the tribunal to inform the parties of the methodology that it proposes to use in determining its costs and expenses. This
methodology is then subject to challenge by the parties. Thereafter, in any award rendered, the tribunal must fix its costs and
expenses consistently with this methodology, and any party may request the appointing authority or the Secretary-General
of the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) to review the calculations. 131
(ii) Costs of the arbitration
9. 88
The costs of the arbitration include the charges for administration of the arbitration by an arbitral institution (if the arbitration
is administered), the costs of hiring rooms for hearings, as well as the fees and expenses of court reporters and interpreters and,
where appropriate, those who provide remote hearing services. These costs, except those of the arbitral institution, are usually
paid directly by the parties in equal shares, pending the tribunal’s determination regarding allocation of costs in its final

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
award. Occasionally, where the arrangements are made by the chairman of the tribunal, or by an administering institution,
such costs are paid from the deposits held by the arbitral tribunal or the institution.
(iii) Costs of the parties
9. 89
The costs of the parties include not only the fees and expenses of the legal representatives engaged to represent the parties
at the arbitration hearing, but also the costs incurred in the preparation of the case. There will also be other professional fees
and expenses, such as those of accountants or expert witnesses, as well as the hotel and travelling expenses of the lawyers,
witnesses, and others involved in the case as well as copying and printing charges, telephone, email, and other data expenses.
All of these costs are likely to be substantial in a major case.
9. 90
The parties also incur costs that may be considerable in terms of the time spent on the case by senior officials, directors, or
employees of the parties themselves, to say nothing of the indirect costs of disruption to their ordinary business. In a major
arbitration, a small management team may be constituted to take charge of the case, liaising with the lawyers and reporting
back to senior management. The cost of such ‘executive’, or ‘management’, time may be high. This poses an important
question. If it is possible to recover the legal costs and expenses of bringing or defending a claim in arbitration, should it be
possible to recover the cost of executive time, particularly if this includes—as it often does—the cost of in-house counsel?
9. 91
Traditionally, such costs have been regarded as part of the normal cost of running a business enterprise or a government
department, rather than the recoverable costs of the winning party. 132  The UNCITRAL Rules, for example, do not include
such costs in the definition of what constitutes the ‘costs of the arbitration’. 133  It may be possible to include them, however,
as part of a claim for the damages caused, for example, by the respondent’s breach of contract, although this would pose
questions as to whether or not such losses were too remote to be recoverable.
9. 92
Parties to international arbitrations are increasingly making use of third-party funding, which in turn is leading to claims for
the award of such costs as part of the ‘other costs’ incurred in connection with the arbitration. There is authority in England
that an arbitrator’s general power to award costs includes the power to award the costs of third-party funding as ‘other costs’
of a party, 134  and given the increasing use of such funding in international arbitration it seems certain that such claims will
become more common in the future.
(iv) Assessment
9. 93
In assessing how costs should be allocated, many institutional rules expressly adopt the principle that ‘costs follow the
event’ 135  (which used to mean ‘winner takes all’ but now means, more appropriately, that the allocation of costs between the
parties should reflect their relative success or failure in the arbitration). Other rules, however, are less explicit. For example,
the SIAC Rules, while recognising the tribunal’s power to determine the apportionment of costs, provide no guidance on how
it should do so. 136  In the authors’ experience, it is increasingly common for arbitral tribunals broadly to adopt the principle
that ‘costs follow the event’ as a starting point, thereafter adjusting the allocation of costs as necessary depending on the
specific circumstances of the case. 137
9. 94
Many sets of arbitration rules provide further guidance on the circumstances a tribunal may take into account in allocating
costs. For example, the ICC Rules indicate that the tribunal may consider such circumstances as it considers relevant
(including the extent to which each party has conducted the arbitration in an expeditious and cost-effective manner) before
making a decision on the amount of costs to be awarded. 138  A similar provision appears in the 2020 version of the LCIA

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
Rules. 139  The UNCITRAL Rules adopt a more conservative approach: while recognising that the arbitral tribunal may
take into account the circumstances of the case when allocating costs between the parties, they do not explicitly mention
cooperative or disruptive behaviour of the parties as a factor.
9. 95
Claims for recovery of parties’ legal costs usually set out the time spent on the case by individual lawyers within the parties’
legal team, together with a note of their individual ‘chargeout’ rates as fixed by their particular firm. It is then a simple matter
of multiplication to arrive at a figure for the total costs of the legal fees. However, there is no necessary correlation between
the time spent by a lawyer on a particular line of enquiry, research, or argument and the value of that time, in terms of the end
result. Even if it is assumed that every minute spent on the case was of value—a somewhat brave assumption—the hourly
‘charge-out rate’ of the lawyers concerned will almost certainly vary from one country to another, and from place to place
within the same country. In consequence, the tribunal will need to exercise its own judgement and experience in deciding (in
retrospect) broadly how much time should reasonably have been spent on the case and what hourly rates should reasonably
have been charged.
9. 96
A less difficult problem is that of deciding when the assessment of costs should be made. Arbitration rules, such as those of
UNCITRAL 140  and the SCC, 141  give their answer, providing for the costs of the arbitration to be fixed in the award. The
ICC Rules 142  provide differently, permitting the tribunal to make decisions as to costs at any time during the arbitration.
This means that if there is, for instance, an application to stop the arbitration on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction and this
application is refused, the arbitral tribunal, in giving its decision, would be entitled to order the unsuccessful applicant to pay
the costs of the application. In practice, most tribunals prefer not to spend time dealing with applications for costs during the
course of the proceedings, but leave it to their final award.
9. 97
In the authors’ experience, there is very much more concern by lawyers and their clients than was once the case, about the
money they have spent and are spending on the arbitration and the likelihood of recovering some, if not all, of that money.
This is not surprising, given the very substantial costs that may be incurred, with the total sum in high profile cases running
into many millions of dollars. This emphasis on costs places an additional burden on the tribunal, in deciding what specific
items of costs to award and how to allocate them as between the parties.
9. 98
In previous editions of this book, the authors suggested that most international arbitral tribunals that make an award of costs
in favour of the winning party tend to adopt a ‘broad-brush’ approach in assessing the amount to be paid, rather than going
through the bill item by item as a trained and experienced costs assessor would do. Based on our experience both as counsel
and as arbitrator, we still think this is the case. However, we then went on to commend the approach of Judge Holtzmann,
an experienced US arbitrator who, in a case in the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal, proposed criteria that included the
following questions for the tribunal to ask itself:
 
•Is the amount of the costs claimed reasonable?
 
•Are the circumstances of the particular case such as to make it reasonable to apportion such costs?
9. 99
On the criteria of reasonableness, Judge Holtzmann said:
The classic test of reasonableness is not, however, an invitation to mere subjectivity. Objective tests of
reasonableness of lawyers’ fees are well known. Such tests typically assign weight primarily to the time spent
and complexity of the case. In modern practice, the amount of time required to be spent is often a gauge
of the extent of the complexities involved. Where the Tribunal is presented with copies of bills for services,
or other appropriate evidence, indicating the time spent, the hourly billing rate, and a general description
of the professional services rendered, its task need be neither onerous nor mysterious. The range of typical
hourly billing rates is generally known and, as evidence before the Tribunal in various cases including this one
indicates, it does not greatly differ between the US and countries of Western Europe, where both claimants and
respondents before the Tribunal typically hire their outside counsel. Just how much time any lawyer reasonably
needs to accomplish a task can be measured by the number of issues involved in a case and the amount of

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
evidence requiring analysis and presentation. While legal fees are not to be calculated on the basis of the pounds
of paper involved, the Tribunal by the end of a case is able to have a fair idea, on the basis of the submissions
made by both sides, of the approximate extent of the effort that was reasonably required. Nor should the Tribunal
neglect to consider the reality that legal bills are usually first submitted to businessmen. The pragmatic fact that
a businessman has agreed to pay a bill, not knowing whether or not the Tribunal would reimburse the expenses,
is a strong indication that the amount billed was considered reasonable by a reasonable man spending his own
money, or the money of the corporation he serves. 143
9. 100
A number of subsequent Iran–United States Claims Tribunal awards have referred to, and adopted, this test as a guide. 144
Furthermore, in the more recent, much publicised, and very substantial Yukos cases, 145  a highly distinguished tribunal, also
applying the UNCITRAL Rules, adopted a similar approach. Judge Holtzmann’s statement, made over thirty years ago, has
stood the test of time well. However, there are now two comments which we think we should make. First, whilst the fees
charged by US lawyers in international arbitrations are perhaps, as Judge Holtzmann says, still comparable ‘to those charged
in countries of Western Europe’, this may not be correct for all of the rest of the world; secondly, whilst the fact that the client
(‘a businessman’) has agreed to the amount of the fees is certainly a factor to be taken into consideration, it may not be a
‘strong indication’ that those fees are reasonable, but merely that the businessman concerned is accustomed to a level of fees
that may well be very much higher than other businessmen, states, or corporations can afford.
(k) Requirements imposed by national law
9. 101
Most national legislation is silent concerning awards of costs in international arbitrations. 146  The Model Law also does not
address this question. Some states that have adopted the Model Law have added provisions regarding awards of the costs of
arbitration, but not many. 147  As with interest, and indeed all other matters concerning the powers of the tribunal, any specific
provisions of the lex arbitri concerning costs must be respected. However, the practices of national courts in following their own
rules in relation to awarding costs do not appear to be an appropriate guide for the way in which an international tribunal should
exercise the discretion granted to it under either the relevant set of rules or the lex arbitri. 148  It is suggested that international
tribunals, wherever the seat of arbitration, should be guided by the lex arbitri and by the applicable substantive law as to the
scope of its discretion, and by the applicable arbitration rules (if any) as to the exercise of that discretion.
Footnotes
54
Lesotho Highlands Development Authority v Impregilo SpA and ors [2003] EWCA Civ 1159.
55
Lesotho Highlands Development Authority v Impregilo SpA and ors [2005] UKHL 43.
56
LCIA Rules, Art. 26.3.
57
ICDR Rules, Art. 34.4.
58
Lew, Mistelis, and Kröll, Comparative International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2003), p. 651.
59
British Airways Board v Laker Airways Ltd [1985] AC 58 (HL).
60
See paragraph 9.161. It would lead to an absurd result if an arbitral tribunal applying US antitrust law could determine the
issue of liability under that law, but not award the mandatory remedy provided for in that law. The point was considered
by a US court in PPG Inc v Pilkington Plc (1995) XX YBCA 885.
61
In ICC Case No. 5946 (1991) XVI YBCA 97, at 113, an ICC arbitration held in Geneva, a claim was made for exemplary
damages, but this claim was refused on the basis that: ‘damages that go beyond compensatory damages to constitute
a punishment of the wrongdoer [… punitive or exemplary damages], are considered contrary to Swiss public policy,
which must be respected by an arbitral tribunal sitting in Switzerland even if the arbitral tribunal must decide a dispute
according to a law that may allow punitive or exemplary damages as such: see Art 135(2) Switzerland’s Federal Code

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
on Private International Law of December 1987, which refuses to allow enforcement of a judgment awarding damages
that cannot be awarded in Switzerland [ … ]’.
62
See Rookes v Barnard [1964] AC 1129. The three categories are: (a) abuse of power by servants of the government;
(b) conduct that was motivated by the pursuit of profits; and (c) where punitive, or ‘exemplary’, damages expressly
authorised by statute.
63
For contract cases, see Addis v Gramophone Co. Ltd [1909] AC 488, with exceptions to the general rule at 495. For
actions in tort, see Rookes v Barnard [1964] AC 1129, [1967] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 28 (HL).
64
Examples of statutes that provide for multiple damages in the United States are the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act of 1970 (RICO) and antitrust laws that provide for triple damages.
65
Bundesgerichtshof (Neue Juristische Wochenschrift, 1992), at 3096ff. The Court has affirmed it in two more recent
decisions: BVerfG, Beschluß vom 24.01.2007—2 BvR 1133/04; BVerfG, Beschluß vom 14.06.2007—2 BvR 2247/06.
66
Similarly, Dutch courts have held that a judgment to pay punitive damages cannot be recognised and enforced in the
Netherlands without further enquiry: see the decision of the District Court of Rotterdam, 17 February 1995, [1996]
NIPR 205, at 207.
67
For a comprehensive review of the powers of arbitrators to award punitive damages, see Gotanda, Supplemental
Damages in Private International Law (Kluwer Law International, 1998), pp. 226–229.
68
While neither the US Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 (FAA) nor the Uniform Arbitration Act of 1955, as amended
(UAA), expressly specifies the remedies available in international arbitrations taking place in the United States (e.g.,
the UAA, s. 21, empowers arbitrators to ‘order such remedies as the arbitrator considers just and appropriate under the
circumstances of the arbitration proceeding’), courts have confirmed that arbitrators have the power to award specific
performance even if the arbitration agreement does not specify this remedy: see, e.g., Brandon v MedPartners Inc., 203
FRD 677, 686 (SD Fla. 2001).
69
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 48(5)(b).
70
Where enforcement takes place in a New York Convention State, there is nothing in the New York Convention that gives
the court power to resist enforcement simply on the basis that the award contains an order for specific performance.
71
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 48(5)(a).
72
Cambodia v Thailand [1962] ICJ Rep 6.
73
Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion [2004] ICJ
Rep 136.
74
Ibid., at [153].
75
Bernhard von Pezold and others v Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15, Award, 28 July 2015, at [744].
In this case, the tribunal considered that, in order to achieve full reparation, it was also necessary to award claimants
compensation for losses incurred as a result of the expropriations.
76
Case Concerning the Factory at Chorzów (Claim for Indemnity) (Germany v Poland) (the Chorzów Factory case) [1928]
PCIJ Series A No. 17, at 47 (emphasis added).
77
ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007, IIC 305 (2007).
78
IIC 305 (2007).
79
See also RREEF v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/30, at 473 (in which the tribunal held that restitution
would not be an appropriate remedy as it would imply ‘repealing laws and regulations’ and would accordingly amount
to a disproportionate interference with Spain’s sovereignty). To the same effect, see also Antin v Kingdom of Spain,
ICSID Case No. ARB/13/3, at 636 and Masdar v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/1, at 559.
80
See, e.g., ICC Rules, Art. 28.2; UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 26. See paragraphs 7.28ff.
81
Bharat Aluminium Co. v Kaiser Aluminium Technical Services Inc. (2012) 9 SCC 552.
82
This prior rule was applicable only in respect of proceedings pursuant to arbitration agreements executed after 6
September 2012. In respect of arbitration agreements executed prior to this date, the pre-Balco regime as set out in
Bhatia International v Bulk Trading S.A. (2002) 4 SCC 105 applied. Under the rule in Bhatia, interim relief from Indian
courts was available in respect of foreign seated arbitrations.
83
Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996, s. 2(2) (as amended).
84
PASL Wind Solutions v GE Power Conversion India, Civil Appeal No. 1647 of 2021, 20 April 2021.
85
See, e.g., the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 48(3).
86
For further discussion of this arbitration, see Chapter 3.
87
The original concession was granted by King Saud of Saudi Arabia in 1933, for a period of sixty years.
88
Saudi Arabia v Arabian American Oil Co. (Aramco) (1963) 27 ILR 117, at 145.

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
89
See West Tankers Inc v Allianz Spa and another [2012] EWCA Civ 27 (in which the English Court of Appeal confirmed
that the phrase ‘enforced in the same manner as a judgment to the same effect’ in the English Arbitration Act, s. 66(1),
allows a court to give leave for a declaratory award to be enforced as a judgment). As is clear from the judgment, however,
this is not a blanket rule and it will be necessary to satisfy the court that such enforcement is appropriate in each case.
90
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 48(5)(c). See also the discussion of the scope of the arbitration clause in Chapter 2,
paragraphs 2.70–2.80.
91
Provided that it is not unlawful or contrary to public policy.
92
F & G Sykes (Wessex) Ltd v Fine Fare Ltd [1967] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 53. See also Veeder, ‘England’, in Paulsson and
Bosman (eds) ICCA International Handbook on Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 1984).
93
Mamidoil-Jetoil Greek Petroleum Co. SA v Okta Crude Oil Refinery AD [2001] 2 All ER (Comm) 193, at 215.
94
Levy, ‘L’interprétation arbitrale’ (2013–14) 4 Rev Arb 861.
95
See Anway and von Mehren, ‘The evolution of gas price review arbitrations’, in Rowley KC, Bishop, and Kaiser (eds)
The Guide to Energy Arbitrations (4th edn, Global Arbitration Review, 2020).
96
Available online at http://www.unidroit.org/english/principles/contracts/principles2004/blackletter2004.pdf.
97
Unlike classic ‘freezing’ clauses, such provisions are not designed to freeze the legal regime applicable to a contract.
Rather, they attempt to deal with the consequences of change by providing for the negotiation of contractual amendments
to reinstate the initial economic balance of the contract (see Partasides and Martinez, ‘Of taxes and stabilization’, in
Rowley et al. (eds) The GAR Guide to Energy Arbitrations (3rd edn, Global Arbitration Review, 2019)).
98
Veeder, ‘Whose arbitration is it anyway: The parties’ or the arbitration tribunal’s? An interesting question?’, in Newman
and Hill (eds) The Leading Arbitrators’ Guide to International Arbitration (2nd edn, Juris, 2008), p. 344. See also Brower
and Sharpe, ‘Awards of compound interest in international arbitration: The Aminoil non-precedent’ (2006) 3 TDM 5.
99
The approach to interest in Saudi Arabia appears to be the most restrictive amongst Islamic jurisdictions (Saudi
Arbitration Law, art 55(2)(b); see also Al-Ammari, ‘Arbitration in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’ (2014) 30 Arb Intl 387,
at 406). In contrast, arbitral awards dealing with interest under Shari’ah law in other Islamic jurisdictions have shown
that it is possible to grant interest, or something akin to interest under another name (see ICC case 7373, Final Award,
(2004) 15(1) ICC International Court of Arbitration Bulletin 72, in which the tribunal noted that ‘numerous statute laws
of the Islamic world permit the tribunal to award interest to compensate financial damages. It is well known that Islamic
banks grant interest to their clients without using the word “interest” ’). See also the decision of the English courts in
Sanghi Polyesters Ltd (India) v The International Investor KCFC (Kuwait) [2000] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 480.
100
Saleh, ‘The recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards in the states of the Arab Middle East’, in Lew (ed.)
Contemporary Problems in International Arbitration (CCLS/Kluwer, 1986), pp. 348–349.
101
Exceptionally, the LCIA Rules, Art. 26.4, provides that the arbitral tribunal may award simple or compound interest up
to the date of compliance with the award, and without being bound by the rates of interest practised by any state court
or other legal authority. See also SIAC Rules, r. 32.9. For a discussion of compound interest, see paragraphs 9.75ff.
102
See Gotanda, ‘Awarding interest in international arbitration’ (1996) 90 Am J Intl L 40, at 50ff; Gotanda, ‘A study of
interest’, Villanova University School of Law Working Paper Series No. 83 (August 2007), available online at http://
digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/wps/art83/, pp. 3ff.
103
See, e.g., the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 49.
104
Accordingly, under German conflict-of-laws rules, if an arbitral tribunal sitting in Germany were to conclude that the
substantive law of the contract was English, it would apply not only those rules of English law governing interest that
English law classifies as substantive, but also those rules that English law classifies as procedural, because a court or
arbitral tribunal sitting in Germany would classify such procedural rules as being of a substantive nature for this purpose.
105
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 49(3). Almost identical provisions are found in the Irish Arbitration (International)
Commercial Act 1998, s. 10(2), and the Singapore International Arbitration Act, s. 20(1).
106
Australian International Arbitration Acts 1974–1989, ss. 25(1) and 26; equivalent provisions are also found in the
Maltese Arbitration Act 1996, ss. 63(1) and 64.
107
Hong Kong Arbitration Ordinance 1997, Ch. 341, ss. 2GH and 2GI; Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996, s.
31(7)(a) and (b); Singapore International Arbitration Act (Ch. 143A) 2002, ss. 12(5)(b) and 20.
108
As Professor Park observed in his 2002 Freshfields Lecture, there are, in theory, three kinds of arbitrator—namely,
those who can count and those who cannot: see Park, ‘Arbitration’s Protean nature: The value of rules and the risks
of discretion’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 279.
109
For the avoidance of doubt, compounding interest involves capitalising interest and accruing further interest on such
capitalised interest. The difference between simple and compound interest can be significant where the amount in dispute
is large and the time periods involved are lengthy.
110
See also French Civil Code, Art. 1343-2 (providing for the capitalisation of judgment debts after one year); and Brazilian
Civil Code, Art. 591 (permitting the annual compounding of interest on certain outstanding debts).

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
111
Arnaldez, Derains, and Hascher, Collection of ICC Arbitral Awards 1991–1995 (Kluwer Law International, 1997), p.
459.
112
Official Records of the General Assembly, F50, 6th Session, Supplement No. 10 (AR/56/10), Ch. IV, E.1.
113
Compañía del Desarollo de Santa Elena SA v Republic of Costa Rica (2000) 39 ILM 1317, at [103].
114
The tribunal in Santa Elena set out a number of reasons why compound interest may be justified on an expropriation
award, including in order to ensure full reparation under international law (see Secomb, Interest in International
Arbitration (Oxford University Press, 2019), at 4.133–4.141).
115
Wena Hotels Ltd v Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Award; IIC 273 (2000), (2002) 41 ILM 896.
116
With respect to NAFTA claims, see Pope Talbot v Government of Canada, Award on Damages, Ad hoc UNCITRAL, IIC
195 (2002); SD Myers Inc. v Government of Canada, Second Partial Award, Ad hoc UNCITRAL, IIC 250 (2002). Other
awards include Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling G SA v Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/99/6,
Award, IIC 169 (2002); CME Czech Republic BV v Czech Republic, Ad hoc UNCITRAL, Final Award and Separate
Opinion, IIC 62 (2003); Azurix Corporation v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Award, IIC 24 (2006);
ADC Affiliate Ltd, ADC & ADMC Management Ltd v Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16, Award, IIC
1 (2006); UAB E Energija (Lithuania) v Republic of Latvia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/33, Award, 22 December 2017;
Gavrilovic and Gavrilovic d.o.o. v Republic of Croatia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/39, Award, 26 July 2018; RREEF
Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited and RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure Two Lux S.à r.l. v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID
Case No. ARB/13/30, Award, 11 December 2019. All of these decisions are in the public domain and can be found online
at http://icsid.worldbank.org.
117
Uchkunova and Temnikov, ‘A procrustean bed: Pre- and post-award interest in ICSID arbitration’ (2014) 29 ICSID Rev
648, at 659 (finding that only 10 out of 42 awards post Saint Elena applied simple interest).
118
Iran–US CTR 122, 269 (1983).
119
Gotanda, ‘Awarding interest in international arbitration’ (1996) 90 Am J Intl L 40, at 61.
120
Commentators recommend that awards that might potentially be enforced in Saudi Arabia should contain separate
dispositions for compensation and interest respectively (see Secomb, Interest in International Arbitration (Oxford
University Press, 2019), at 2.136).
121
For a comprehensive review of the power of arbitrators to award post-award interest, see Gotanda, Supplemental
Damages in Private International Law (Kluwer Law International, 1998), pp. 85–93.
122
Sometimes tribunals may impose a higher rate for post-award interest than pre-award interest (see, e.g., Gold Reserve
Inc. v Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/09/1, Award of 22 September 2014, at [856]). This approach is intended
to incentivise the award-debtor to satisfy the award promptly. In the investment treaty context, however, this approach
has been criticised as unjustifiably ‘imply[ing] that there are reasons to believe that the State will not fulfil its
international obligation to comply promptly’ (see, e.g., Antin Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.à.r.l. and Antin
Energia Termosolar B.V. v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/31, Award, 15 June 2018, at [733]).
123
In respect of the US see, e.g., Carte Blanche (Singapore) Pte Ltd v Carte Blanche Intl Ltd, 888 F2d 260 (2d Cir 1989)
268–70 (holding that the relevant statutory rate was mandatory once the award was submitted to court for enforcement).
124
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 40.1 and 40.2.
125
ICC Rules, Art. 38.1.
126
ICDR Rules, r. 34.
127
SCC Rules, Arts 49 and 50.
128
SIAC Rules, Art. 35.1 and 35.2.
129
LCIA Rules, Art. 28.1.
130
LCIA Rules, Art. 14.13; SIAC Rules, Art. 35.2.c.
131
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 41.3 and 41.4.
132
See Gotanda, Supplemental Damages in Private International Law (Kluwer Law International, 1998), p. 191.
133
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 40.
134
Essar Oilfields Services Limited v Norscot Rig Management PVT Limited [2016] EWHC 2361 (dismissing a serious
irregularity challenge under the English Arbitration Act, s. 68(2)(b) to an ICC award in which the arbitrator awarded
Norscot the £1.94 million costs of third-party funding it had obtained in order to bring the arbitration).
135
CIETAC Rules, Art. 52(2); DIS Rules, Art. 35.2; LCIA Rules, Art. 28.4; PCA Rules, Art. 42(1); UNCITRAL Rules,
Art. 42(1).
136
SIAC Rules, rr. 35.2, 37.
137
Decisions on Costs in International Arbitration, 2015(2) ICC Dispute Resolution Bulletin, para. 13.
138
ICC Rules, Art. 38.5.

Section C. - Remedies, UKBC-REDFERN 530638657 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
139
LCIA Rules, Art. 28.4.
140
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 40.
141
SCC Rules, Art. 49.5.
142
ICC Rules, Art. 38.3.
143
Separate opinion of Judge Holtzmann, reported in [1985] Iranian Assets Litigation Reporter 10860, at 10863; (1985)
8 Iran–US CTR 329, at 332–333.
144
For a detailed review of the practices of the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal, see van Hof, Commentary on the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (Kluwer Law International, 1991), pp. 293-311.
145
For example, see Yukos Universal Ltd (Isle of Man) v The Russian Federation, PCA Case No. AA 227, UNCITRAL,
18 July 2014, at [1887].
146
By way of exception, see the English Arbitration Act, s. 61.
147
Born, International Commercial Arbitration (2nd edn, Kluwer Law International, 2014), p. 3087.
148
For a comprehensive review of the practices of international tribunals concerning the award of costs, see Gotanda,
Supplemental Damages in Private International Law (Kluwer Law International, 1998), pp. 173-192.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
