Article 25(1): Establishing the facts of the case, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407069 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 25(1): Establishing the facts of the case
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 25(1): Establishing the facts of the case
“The arbitral tribunal shall proceed within as short a time as possible to establish the facts of the case by all appropriate
means.”
25-10
Under art.25(1), it is the obligation of the Tribunal to establish the facts of the case. Article 31(1) imposes a further obligation
on the Tribunal as it states that the Tribunal is to render its final award within six months from the Terms of Reference. This time
frame is very difficult to follow and is not met in most cases submitted to ICC arbitration. 347  Article 31(1) therefore provides
for extensions. But the requirement that the Tribunal take the initiative to complete the proceedings within a certain time frame
is unlike that in most national courts. For arbitrations subject to the Expedited Procedure Provisions under art.30, the Tribunal
has a further requirement to issue an award within six months after the date of the case management conference.
25-11
Management of the proceedings is important at all stages of the arbitration. Arbitral proceedings may have to be adapted to
changing circumstances, and the parties may perceive ever more diverging interests as the procedure develops. Therefore,
on each occasion on which the Tribunal changes the procedure, it should ensure that the result is not to derail subsequent
proceedings. All the same, the authors strongly believe that time is not an objective in itself, and that a sound balance must
always be found between a party’s right and expectation to fully present its case or defence on the one hand, and the need to
bring the process to an end in a timely fashion on the other hand. Reconciling these objectives is often difficult and leads to
tensions that a Tribunal must address in each case by taking all circumstances into consideration. 348
25-12
The detailed means for establishing the facts of the case are discussed under the various other subsections of art.25. However,
establishing the facts of the case in an ICC arbitration depends basically on evidence provided by the parties. It is seldom that
a Tribunal will take the initiative to collect and review evidence from sources other than the parties, not least because in most
cases it would not be able to do so, unless the evidence is in the public domain (in particular accessible through the internet).
Nevertheless, Tribunals may do so at the request of a party or to some extent even through a Tribunal-appointed expert.
25-13
In deciding on the appropriate means to establish the facts of the case, the Tribunal will have to take into account the basic
procedural requirements discussed under arts 19 and 22. It will also have to decide on several basic differences that may arise
between the parties and the Tribunal.
25-14
The first difference is that claimants (or counter-claimants) usually wish to pursue their claims actively. Claimants have the
initiative as to bringing the proceedings and usually will do so after they have prepared for it. Claimants (or counter-claimants)
stand to receive a payment if they win. Therefore, their financial incentive is to complete the proceedings rapidly.
25-15

Article 25(1): Establishing the facts of the case, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407069 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Respondents usually have not chosen the timing of the dispute, although they may well have advance warning of it and have
had an adequate time to prepare. Respondents without a counterclaim are faced with a financial incentive to delay if there is
a real risk of loss, although terminating legal proceedings may after all also be in a respondent’s interest from a cost and time
point of view. However, in many cases, there is at least the perception that respondents may seek to delay matters. Additional
parties joined pursuant to art.7 may have particular procedural concerns as they may be peripheral or have conditional claims.
25-16
The second difference is that ICC arbitration is applicable in a wide range of situations with parties having varying financial
resources. The parties may be major groups or companies with substantial turnovers and revenue, governments or state
enterprises. But the parties may also be relatively small distributors, contractors or buyers or sellers (for example, of industrial
equipment), sometimes acting as individuals, or through small companies, of which these individuals are the sole or main
shareholders. Funding the costs of an international arbitration, including the legal costs of foreign counsel and the travel of the
party, its witnesses and experts to a foreign (and sometimes distant) place of arbitration will strain smaller parties and even
more so when they come from developing countries. The appropriate means to establish the facts of the case for one company
with large resources may be totally out of reach for smaller companies or individuals. As a result, an important issue in some
arbitrations is providing dispute resolution that is accessible for smaller companies or individuals. 349
25-17
The third difference is that the Tribunal deals in general not directly with the parties but with their counsel. Therefore, issues
as to timing and expense are affected by the commitments—and preferences—of counsel. If both counsel agree on additional
time periods, it will be difficult for the Tribunal not to respect that agreement. But if the additional time periods are requested
by one counsel, the Tribunal must keep in mind its obligation to establish the facts of the case “in as short a time as possible”
and “to conduct the arbitration in an expeditious … manner …)”, art.22(1).
25-18
The fourth difference is that the parties may disagree strongly on whether to separate out legal issues to be decided: whether to
bifurcate proceedings. 350  The issue of whether the Tribunal holds separate, initial hearings on threshold matters that may make
further evidence unnecessary is one of the early basic differences that may arise between the parties. But typical issues that are
decided at the outset include decisions as to the applicable language, the applicable law and the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. 351
25-19
The parties and their representatives are under a good faith obligation to cooperate in the arbitration procedure. The duty of party
representatives has been the subject of a working group of the IBA that has resulted in the IBA Representation Guidelines. 352
These Guidelines are not binding as such, although they are referred to in the 2021 ICC Note and may be adopted by Tribunals.
Moreover, the IBA Representation Guidelines deal with very sensitive issues such as the duty of the lawyers involved with
respect to facts and provide for consequences for a failure to comply. Although it does not appear that they are widely-
adopted, 353  if at all, it is worth noting some of the principles that the IBA Representation Guidelines set out with respect to
establishing the facts of the case. They include the following:
 
“9.A Party Representative should not make any knowingly false submission of fact to the Arbitral Tribunal.
 
10.In the event that a Party Representative learns that he or she previously made a false submission of
fact to the Arbitral Tribunal, the Party Representative should, subject to countervailing considerations of
confidentiality and privilege, promptly correct such submission.
 
11.A Party Representative should not submit Witness or Expert evidence that he or she knows to be false.
If a Witness or Expert intends to present or presents evidence that a Party Representative knows or later
discovers to be false, such Party Representative should promptly advise the Party whom he or she represents
of the necessity of taking remedial measures and of the consequences of failing to do so. Depending upon
the circumstances, and subject to countervailing considerations of confidentiality and privilege, the Party
Representative should promptly take remedial measures, which may include one or more of the following:
 
(a)advise the Witness or Expert to testify truthfully;

Article 25(1): Establishing the facts of the case, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407069 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
(b)take reasonable steps to deter the Witness or Expert from submitting false evidence;
 
(c)urge the Witness or Expert to correct or withdraw the false evidence;
 
(d)correct or withdraw the false evidence;
 
(e)withdraw as Party Representative if the circumstances so warrant.”
25-20
Many of these principles are in fact applicable amongst members of national bar associations. And there is no reason why a
similar standard should not be applicable in international arbitration, although the issue of enforcement is a real one. 354  The
main sanction for perceived misbehaviour in this respect is most likely to be in costs.
Footnotes
347
In expedited procedures under art.30, the six-month time limit runs from the date of the case management conference,
there being no need to establish Terms of Reference for so-called small claims proceedings, see art.4(1) of the Expedited
Procedure Rules.
348
In ICC Case No.20707 (a tribunal chaired by one of the co-authors) made the following statements in its procedural
order no.6 at paras 14–17: “… while the Tribunal considered that it was important to maintain the Hearing dates, that
was not a goal itself. Under Article 22 of the ICC Rules, the Tribunal after consulting with the Parties, may adopt
procedural measures that it considers appropriate, while ensuring that each Party has a reasonable opportunity to present
its case. In light of the Parties’ submissions, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that it is in the best interest of
fair proceedings and as such less ‘invasive’ to deal with this unfortunate situation created by Claimants by adopting
the second option of adjourning the Evidentiary Hearing to a later date. The Tribunal prefers to have a full record, and
therefore would like to proceed to a thorough verification of admissibility of the New Evidence, followed by a decision
as to what will be allowed on record. Other than incurring some additional costs, Respondent will not be prejudiced by
the Tribunal’s decision. As this is ultimately Claimants’ case, they remain responsible for the delay occasioned by this
later submission, and will foremost suffer the associated consequences. The Tribunal therefore considers that Claimants
should include and explain their requests concerning the New Evidence in a ‘New Evidence Schedule’, and Respondent
should be allowed to respond in the same schedule; a model of which is attached to the present PO 6 in the format of
what some practitioners refer to as the ‘Stern Schedule’.”
349
Article 22(1) expressly requires the Tribunal and the parties to make every effort to conduct the arbitration in an
expeditious and cost-effective manner, having regard to the complexity and value of the dispute.
350
For articles discussing the criteria of bifurcation, see Benedettelli, “To Bifurcate or Not To Bifurcate? That is the
(Ambiguous) Question”, (2013) Arb. Int. Vol.29 No.3, p.493; Greenwood, “Revisiting Bifurcation and Efficiency
in International Arbitration Proceedings”, (2019) J. Int. Arb. Vol.36 No.4. More generally see Born, International
Arbitration, 3rd edn (Kluwer Law International, 2021), p.2406 and following.
351
Tallerico & Behrendt, “The Use of Bifurcation and Direct Testimony Witness Statements in International Commercial
Arbitration Proceedings” (2003) J. Int. Arb. Vol.20 No.3, p.295; Greenwood, “Does Bifurcation Really Promote
Efficiency?” (2011) J. Int. Arb. Vol.28 No.2, p.105.
352
Mourre, “About Procedural Soft Law, the IBA Guidelines on Party Representation and the Future of Arbitration”, in
Shaughnessy & Tung (eds), The Powers and Duties of an Arbitrator: Liber Amicorum Pierre A. Karrer (Kluwer Law
International, 2017) p.240.
353
See para.23-60 fn.326 as to the facts that the IBA Rules on Evidence are not mentioned in the 2021 ICC Note.
354
The IBA Representation Guidelines provide in part as follows regarding enforcement: “26. If the Arbitral Tribunal,
after giving the Parties notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard, finds that a Party Representative has committed
Misconduct, the Arbitral Tribunal, as appropriate, may: (a) admonish the Party Representative; (b) draw appropriate
inferences in assessing the evidence relied upon, or the legal arguments advanced by, the Party Representative; (c)
consider the Party Representative’s Misconduct in apportioning the costs of the arbitration, indicating, if appropriate,
how and in what amount the Party Representative’s Misconduct leads the Tribunal to a different apportionment of costs;
(d) take any other appropriate measure in order to preserve the fairness and integrity of the proceedings.” See in that

Article 25(1): Establishing the facts of the case, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407069 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
respect Baizeau, “The IBA Guidelines on Party Representation in International Arbitration: A Plea for Caution”, (2015)
BCDR International Arbitration Review (Kluwer Law International) Vol.2 No.2, pp.343–356.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
