Termination of the Emergency Arbitration Proceedings..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Termination of the Emergency Arbitration Proceedings without
an Order
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Termination of the Emergency Arbitration Proceedings without an Order
29-88
The Order of the Emergency Arbitrator, and its notification to the parties is the last step in any Emergency Arbitration
Proceeding. The Emergency Arbitrator Provisions expressly foresee one situation where the Emergency Arbitration Proceedings
are brought to an end without an Order having been issued by the Emergency Arbitrator. Article 1(6) of the Emergency Arbitrator
Rules authorises the ICC Court’s President to terminate the Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings, if the applicant has failed to
file a Request for Arbitration within 10 days upon having filed the Application. The requirement to do so follows from art.1(6)
of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules.
29-89
Thus, the ICC Court’s President will first have to consult the Emergency Arbitrator before taking such a radical measure. Article
1(6) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules expressly authorises the Emergency Arbitrator to determine that a longer period of time
is necessary for filing the Request for Arbitration. This may be the case in multi-tier arbitration clauses that provide for a “cooling
off” period before a party can file its Request for Arbitration. The dispute resolution mechanism in the FIDIC Conditions of
Contract provide, a good example of cooling-off periods that are not compatible with the 10 days under art.1(6) of the Emergency
Arbitrator Rules. Such provisions should not per se prevent a party from seeking Emergency Measures pending the cooling-off
period. 600  In the case of the FIDIC Conditions, the question arises, however, whether they do not take precedence over and,
in fact, exclude the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions, as per art.29(6)(c). 601
29-90
The possibility to extend the time limit for filing the Request for Arbitration, based on the Emergency Arbitrator’s assessment,
attenuates the stringent and very short 10-day time limit, and effectively allows the Emergency Arbitrator to determine the
deadline by which the applicant must file the Request for Arbitration.
29-91
The Emergency Arbitrator will have to inform not only the ICC Court’s President, but also the parties of his or her decision to
allow a longer period for the filing of the Request for Arbitration, and may have to invite the latter for comments prior to making
such decision. The extension will have to be notified by the Secretariat to both parties. The Emergency Arbitrator Rules do not
indicate the criteria that are to be considered in determining that a longer period is necessary. If the arbitration clause conditions
the filing of the Request for Arbitration on a lapse of time, be it for a simple “cooling off” period prior mediation proceedings,
an extension of the time limit is likely to be justified. The 10-day time limit in art.1(6) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules is
particularly short, compared, for instance, to the 30 days that the SCC Rules provide in the similar situation. 602  In practice,
any plausible explanation of why the drafting of the Request for Arbitration could not yet have been completed, coupled with
a request for a reasonable extension of time, should normally be sufficient for the Emergency Arbitrator’s determination. An
extension of 20 days (or less) would normally seem to be reasonable.
Footnotes

Termination of the Emergency Arbitration Proceedings..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
600
One of the ICC’s standard clauses expressly states that if the dispute has not been settled pursuant to the Mediation Rules
within 45 days following the filing of a Request for Mediation, the dispute shall then be settled under the ICC Rules
of Arbitration, see ICC model clause “Obligation to submit dispute to Mediation, followed by arbitration, if required,”
Part II, Document 1.
601
This issue is discussed at para.29-132 and following.
602
SCC Rules App.II art.9(4)(iii).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
