Section C. - Enforcement under the ICSID Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638677...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section C. - Enforcement under the ICSID Convention
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 11 - Recognition and Enforcement of Arbitral Awards
Section C. - Enforcement under the ICSID Convention
11. 132
The ICSID Convention is considered in some detail in Chapter 8, and creates its own separate enforcement regime. Unless an
ICSID award is revised or annulled under ICSID’s own internal procedures, each contracting state must recognise an ICSID
award as if it were a final judgment of its own national courts and enforce the obligation imposed by that award. 211  To this
end, contracting states must designate a competent court or authority, which will deal with any requests for enforcement of
an ICSID award. 212
11. 133
The special way in which ICSID awards are treated for the purposes of enforcement as compared with arbitral awards being
enforced under the New York Convention is summarised by the English Court of Appeal in the following terms:
It is an important feature of the ICSID Convention that it does not permit an award to be impugned or its
enforcement to be resisted in national courts even in circumstances where a foreign judgment, or even a domestic
judgment, could be challenged. Thus, in contrast, for example, to the New York Convention on the Recognition
and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, a contracting state cannot decline to enforce an ICSID award even
on the ground that its enforcement would be contrary to public policy in that state. Under the scheme of the ICSID
Convention the only powers to contest the validity or enforceability of an award are those contained in the ICSID
Convention itself (in Articles 50–52). Subject to those provisions, enforcement is intended to be automatic. 213
11. 134
In particular, under Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention, ICSID awards ‘shall be binding on all parties and shall not be subject
to any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this Convention’. Article 54(1) of the ICSID Convention
requires state parties to ‘recognize an award rendered pursuant to [the] Convention as binding and enforce the pecuniary
obligations imposed by that award within its territories as if it were a final judgment of a court in that State’.
11. 135
The remedies mentioned in Article 53(1) are restricted to annulment, revision, or interpretation of an award, and they can be
obtained only through ICSID. Thus only an ICSID annulment committee may annul the award. Setting aside or any other review
of ICSID awards by domestic courts is not available.
Article 52(1) contains an exhaustive list of grounds for annulment of ICSID awards, including that (a) the tribunal was not
properly constituted; 214  (b) the tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers; 215  (c) there was corruption on the part of a
member of the tribunal; 216  (d) there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure; 217  or (e) the award failed
to state the reasons on which it is based. 218  There was a period in the early history of ICSID arbitration during which these
grounds were interpreted quite broadly, resulting in de facto appeals on points of law and fact. 219  However, in recent years,
annulment committees have taken a narrower approach, 220  and annulments of ICSID awards have become rarer. The grounds
for annulment are considered in further detail in Chapter 8.
11. 136
In the face of multiple ICSID claims, several Latin American countries have withdrawn from the Convention—namely, Bolivia,
Ecuador, and Venezuela. The possible effects of these withdrawals on the jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals for claims brought
under the ICSID Convention are discussed in Chapter 8.

Section C. - Enforcement under the ICSID Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638677...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
11. 137
In a less dramatic, but nevertheless far-reaching, step, Argentina reacted to the growing number of ICSID awards against it by
arguing that the enforcement of ICSID awards is not automatic. Specifically, Argentina argued that Article 54 of the Convention
requires the claimant party to seek recognition of the award rendered against the respondent state in that state’s national court.
To recall, Article 54 requires each contracting state to enforce ‘the pecuniary obligations imposed by that award within its
territories as if it were a final judgment of a court in that State’. This interpretation has become known as the ‘Rosatti doctrine’,
following its espousal by former Argentine Minister of Justice Dr Horacio Rosatti. However, and perhaps unsurprisingly, it
has now been repeatedly rejected by ad hoc annulment committees considering stay of enforcement applications in Enron v
Argentina 221  and Compañia Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal v Argentina. 222
11. 138
There are a number of regional conventions that may also have a significant bearing on the recognition and enforcement of
foreign arbitral awards. The principal conventions are discussed briefly in turn.
Footnotes
211
ICSID Convention, Art. 54.
212
The courts and authorities designated by each contracting state can be found by clicking into each state listed online in
the ‘Membership’ tab, online at https://icsid.worldbank.org/about/member-states/database-of-member-states. See also
ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations, reg. 23(f).
213
Micula v Romania [2018] EWCA Civ 1801, at [258].
214
This provision is not intended to be an opportunity to challenge members of the tribunal de novo; rather, an ad hoc
committee would be able to annul an award under Art. 52(1)(a) only if there had been a failure to comply properly with
the procedure for challenging members. See Azurix Corporation v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12,
Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, 1 September 2009, at [280], and EDF International
S.A. v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/23, Decision on Annulment, 5 February 2016, at [126].
215
A tribunal can exercise an ‘excess of powers’ not only in exercising a jurisdiction that it does not have, but also in failing
to exercise a jurisdiction that it does possess: see, e.g., Compañía de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal
(formerly Compagnie Générale des Eaux) v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment,
3 July 2002, at [86]. However, not every ‘excess of power’ is ‘manifest’: see, e.g., Standard Chartered Bank (Hong
Kong) Limited v Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20, Decision on Annulment, 22
August 2018, at [181] (holding that an alleged excess of power is ‘manifest’ only if such excess is ‘discernable without
the need for an elaborate analysis of the award’).
216
Corruption implies that the arbitrator receives payment except as provided for by the ICSID Convention and as a
consequence is biased towards one of the parties. It generally differs from bias and ex parte communications. See
Schreuer et al., The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2nd edn, Cambridge University Press, 2009), Section 273.
217
Ad hoc committees have restricted annulment on this ground to violations of those principles that are essential to a
fair hearing, observing that a violation of a non-fundamental rule, no matter how serious, would not call into question
the validity of an award: see, e.g., Malicorp Ltd v Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/18, Decision on
Annulment, 3 July 2013, at [29]. See also Tenaris S.A. and Talta—Trading e Marketing Sociedade Unipessoal Lda. v
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/26, Decision on Annulment, 8 August 2018, at [198] (holding
that ‘it is not enough for the tribunal to have departed from a rule of procedure, or for the departure to have occurred if
it is not serious. Both the serious circumstances of the departure and the fundamental nature of the rule must exist’).
218
This ground of annulment applies only in a clear case in which there has been a failure by the tribunal to give any reasons
for its decision on a particular question, and not in a case in which there has merely been a failure by the tribunal to give
correct or convincing reasons: see, e.g., OI European Group B.V. v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/11/25, Decision on Annulment, 6 December 2018, at [321].
219
See, e.g., the much-criticised Patrick Mitchell v Democratic Republic of Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision
on Annulment, 1 November 2006, in which the ad hoc committee overturned the award on the grounds that the tribunal
in the original proceedings had, in its view, incorrectly determined that the claimant held a protected investment within

Section C. - Enforcement under the ICSID Convention, UKBC-REDFERN 530638677...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
the meaning of the ICSID Convention. The annulment committee deemed that such determination constituted ‘manifest
excess of powers’ under Art. 52(1)(b) of the Convention.
220
See, e.g., AES Summit Generation Ltd and AES-Tisza Erömü Kft v Republic of Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22,
Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, 29 June 2012, at [17] (‘annulment is an exhaustive,
exceptional and narrowly circumscribed remedy and not an appeal’), and Daimler Financial Services A.G. v Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Decision on Annulment, 7 January 2015, at [186] (finding that if the Committee
‘were to undertake a careful and detailed analysis of the respective submissions of the parties before the Tribunal [ … ]
and annul the Award on the ground that its understanding of facts or interpretation of law or appreciation of evidence is
different from that of the Tribunal, it will cross the line that separates annulment from appeal’).
221
See Enron Corporation Ponderosa Assets, LP v Argentine Republic, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for
a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 7 October 2008, at [69], [83], and [85].
222
See Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal v Argentine Republic, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request
for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award Rendered on 20 August 2007, 4 November 2008, at [31]–[37] and [45].
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
