Choice of law by the Tribunal, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406983 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Choice of law by the Tribunal
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Choice of law by the Tribunal
21-10
Where the parties have not chosen the applicable law with respect to a legal issue in a case, the second sentence of art.21(1)
gives the Tribunal wide discretion in determining the law: the Tribunal shall apply the rules of law that it determines to be
appropriate. Thus, arbitrators are given the authority to engage the so-called voie directe, as opposed to applying a rule of
conflict, in determining the applicable law. Tribunals are not bound to follow a specific set of national conflicts of law rules,
and in that respect enjoy a freedom that the judges in a national court do not have. 117
21-11
Although it is very liberal with respect to choice-of-law, art.21(1) nonetheless requires the determination of the applicable rules
of law and its application by the Tribunal since it states that the Tribunal “shall apply the rules of law which it determines
to be appropriate”. The requirement in art.21(1) that the Tribunal apply rules of law is to be contrasted with the provision in
art.21(3) that the parties may agree that the Tribunal decide ex aequo et bono or as amiable compositeur, and therefore without
applying strict rules of law.
21-12
In some awards, Tribunals appear to avoid relying on the applicable law and instead rely solely on the construction and
interpretation of contract provisions. This approach does not appear to be compatible with art.21(1). Although Tribunals are
to take into account the terms of the contract under art.21(2), a contract cannot be interpreted in a legal vacuum. The various
legal systems and other rules of law, such as the UNIDROIT Principles discussed below, set out principles of interpretation.
Moreover, terms used in a contract may have a special meaning depending on the relevant rules of law. 118  Therefore, a Tribunal
should determine which “rules of law” are applicable and apply those rules.
Footnotes
117
See below at para.21-26 and following.
118
A Tribunal may of course decide that the appropriate rules of law in the absence of an agreement between the parties
is some principle of lex mercatoria, such as by UNIDROIT and then apply the principles from that source to interpret
the contract. However, if a Tribunal skips over that step and simply interprets the contract without reference to legal
principles, it may well be caught between arts 21(1) and 21(3).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
