The procedure for deciding the applicable rules of law, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407060...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
The procedure for deciding the applicable rules of law
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
The procedure for deciding the applicable rules of law
21-37
The Request should set out the claimant’s position regarding the applicable law in accordance with art.4(3)(h). 140  The Answer
should contain a response with respect to the applicable law in accordance with art.5(1)(f). 141  Therefore, prior to the constitution
of the Tribunal, it should be clear whether there is a dispute between the parties at least with respect to the rules of law applicable
to the contract. Since it is up to the Tribunal to decide on the rules of law applicable to the contract, the matter will be one of
the issues to be decided and possibly identified as such in the Terms of Reference pursuant to art.23(1)d).
21-38
If the parties have not agreed on the rules of law applicable to the contract, the Tribunal may decide the matter at the outset
normally by way of a partial award. Unless one party requires a hearing, the partial award will often be rendered based on
written submissions of the parties. The decision as to the rules of law applicable would almost always be a final decision on a
point in dispute. Therefore, as a matter of procedure, it would have to be set out in a partial award that would be transmitted to
the ICC Court for scrutiny (see art.34). It would be much less frequent for the Tribunal to rule on the law applicable to other
issues that may arise in the dispute at the outset, other than perhaps the law applicable to extra-contractual claims.
21-39
The procedure required to obtain an award on the rules of law applicable to a dispute will involve some delay. However, the
delay should not be inordinately long. The issue can usually be briefed by the parties promptly and Tribunals are usually able
and have a tendency to decide the issue quickly to enable the parties to deal with the merits of the case. The approval of the draft
award by the ICC Court generally should not result in significant delay, as the court deals with these types of awards generally
in Committee Sessions that are held every week.
21-40
In some cases, rather than having the arbitrators issue a partial award, parties prefer to save the time required for such award
to be issued, and instead authorise the Tribunal to indicate to them in an informal manner the law the parties should refer to in
their submissions. This indication can be in the form of a simple letter or procedural order, but should avoid taking the form of
a decision. For instance, a Tribunal could say that having heard the parties, the Tribunal invites the parties to argue their case
on the assumption that the laws of X apply to the merits of the dispute. 142  This way of proceeding is cost-effective but is not
without risk. If the assumption is incorrect and the Tribunal applies another substantive law, then a party may argue that it was
deprived of the opportunity of arguing the case based on that law. Moreover, if as the matter is argued, it is apparent that the
“assumed” applicable law is unfavourable to a party, that party may argue that another law should be applied even at the risk of
requiring further briefing of the applicable law. The preferred solution would therefore often be either for the parties to agree
on an applicable law or for the Tribunal to decide the issue in an award.
Footnotes
140
See the discussion at para.4-76 and following.
141
See the discussion at para.5-37 and following.

The procedure for deciding the applicable rules of law, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407060...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
142
See also in that context two procedural orders, which dealt with the applicable law in the same way, an interim or partial
award could have done so: Interim Order in ICC Case No.11754 (2003), in: [2010] ICC ICArb. Bull., Special Supplement,
p.20 and Procedural Order in ICC Case No.12949 (2004), in: [2010] ICC ICArb. Bull., Special Supplement, p.86
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
