The Convention on Contracts for International Sale of..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
The Convention on Contracts for International Sale of Goods
(Vienna Convention)
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
The Convention on Contracts for International Sale of Goods (Vienna Convention)
21-41
In most instances, Tribunals, like the parties, will decide upon a system of national law. However, one of the rules of law
frequently considered in ICC arbitration is the Vienna Convention, also often referred to as the CISG. 143  In 2013, 79 countries
have adopted the Vienna Convention, and it has become part of the national law of those countries. Therefore, reference to
Swiss law, for example, has been held to include reference to the Vienna Convention which is an integral part of Swiss law. 144
21-42
Article 1 of the Vienna Convention provides that:
 
3—
(1) This Convention applies to contracts of sale of goods between parties whose places of business are in different States:
(a) when the States are Contracting States; or (b) when the rules of private international law lead to the application of the
law of a Contracting State.
21-43
Article 3 145  of the Vienna Convention specifies in particular that “[c]ontracts for the supply of goods to be manufactured
or produced are to be considered sales unless the party who orders the goods undertakes to supply a substantial part of the
materials necessary for such manufacture or production”. However, art.3(2) provides that “[t]his Convention does not apply
to contracts in which the preponderant part of the obligations of the party who furnishes the goods consists in the supply of
labour or other services”.
21-44
When the Vienna Convention is applicable in an arbitration, its provisions displace some but not all of the provisions of the
national law that would otherwise be applicable. 146  Many Tribunals view it as appropriate to raise the issue of the applicability
of the Vienna Convention whether or not it is raised by the parties, on the basis that it is an integral part of the national law
that may be applicable to the dispute.
Footnotes
143
For a discussion of the application of the Vienna Convention in ICC arbitration, see Mourre, “Application of the Vienna
International Sales Convention in Arbitration”, [2006] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.17, No.1, 43. See also van Houtte, “The
Vienna Sales Convention in ICC Arbitral Practice” including extracts of ICC Arbitral Awards referring to the Vienna
Convention, [2000] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.11 No.2, p.22 and p.34. In 2015, the Vienna Convention was the applicable
law chosen by the parties on only four occasions. However, the authors have been faced with numerous situations where
the Tribunal has applied the Vienna Convention or has considered applying it as part of the national law applicable to
the dispute.
144
Swiss Federal Supreme Court, 16 December 2009, Decision 4A_240/2009 (in an ICC case for which the case number
had not been provided).

The Convention on Contracts for International Sale of..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
145
In addition, art.2 of the Vienna Convention provides that “[t]his Convention does not apply to sales: (a) of goods bought
for personal, family or household use, unless the seller, at any time before or at the conclusion of the contract, neither
knew nor ought to have known that the goods were bought for any such use; (b) by auction; (c) on execution or otherwise
by authority of law; (d) of stocks, shares, investment securities, negotiable instruments or money; (e) of ships, vessels,
hovercraft or aircraft; (f) of electricity”.
146
If the parties have chosen a national law to be applicable, there is frequently a debate about whether the choice of the
national law means the national law with or without the Vienna Convention; on this issue, see for example van Houtte,
“The Vienna Sales Convention in ICC Arbitral Practice” including extracts of ICC Arbitral Awards referring to the
Vienna Convention, [2000] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.11 No.2, p.22 and p.34. See also for a discussion of the application of
the Vienna Convention in ICC arbitration, see Mourre, “Application of the Vienna International Sales Convention in
Arbitration”, [2006] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.17, No.1, 43.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
