Three Admissibility Conditions for the Application, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406948 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Three Admissibility Conditions for the Application
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Three Admissibility Conditions for the Application
29-24
An Application is subject to three conditions of admissibility. First, pursuant to art.29(1), the application must be received by
the Secretariat of the ICC Court “prior to the transmission of the file to the Tribunal pursuant to art.16”. Thus, in a dispute
that is covered by the Application, the Tribunal must not have been constituted or the Tribunal must not have received the file
from the Secretariat.
29-25
Secondly, pursuant to art.29(5) of the Rules, the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions “shall apply to parties that are signatories to
an ICC arbitration agreement or to the successors of such parties”. In other words, emergency relief cannot be obtained against
non-signatories to the arbitration agreement.
29-26
Thirdly, art.29(6), lists three situations in which the application of the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions is excluded:
 
(1)where the arbitration agreement was signed prior to the coming into force of the 2012 Rules, i.e. prior to 1 January
2012; or
 
(2)where the parties have opted out of the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions; or
 
(3)the arbitration agreement upon which the application is based arises from a treaty.
29-27
Article 29(6) is a negative condition, i.e. satisfied if under none of the three aforementioned cases the Emergency Arbitrator
Provisions are or have been excluded.
29-28
The second and third admissibility conditions are discussed below when dealing with art.29(5) and (6) of the Rules respectively.
They are for the President of the ICC Court to assess on a prima facie basis; it is enough for the President “to consider” that
these conditions are met, art.1(5) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. The Emergency Arbitrator Provisions do not state what
level of evidence is required for the President to consider the signature or successor requirements to be satisfied. In practice, the
ICC Court’s President should proceed with the matter if there is a prima facie case that the condition is met. 553  The Emergency
Arbitrator renders a final decision on admissibility and determines whether the conditions have been met. If the President
considers one or both of these two conditions not to be satisfied on a prima facie basis, the Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings
will come to an immediate halt, unless the President requests further information and clarification from the applicant. Of the
80 applications reviewed in the Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration, on two occasions the President considered that
the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions were not applicable. 554
29-29
Under the Emergency Arbitrator Provisions, nothing prevents the President of the ICC Court from requesting the applicant
provide further clarification and/or evidence on one or both of these two conditions. The power to ask additional information
is inherent to the administrative function of the President. It can also be based on art.8(1) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules,
which gives the President the right to fill any gaps under the Rules. It is implied in art.1(5) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules,
which states that “if and to the extent” the President considers the conditions with respect to art.29(5) and (6) of the Rules to
be satisfied.

Three Admissibility Conditions for the Application, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406948 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
29-30
Under art.2(1) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules, the President is expected to appoint the Emergency Arbitrator within “as short
a time as possible, normally within two days from the Secretariat’s receipt of the Application”. In the President’s absence, the
aforementioned admissibility check can also be carried out by one of the Vice-Presidents pursuant to art.8(2) of the Emergency
Arbitrator Rules. 555  To allow prompt attention to the matter, the Secretariat will have to alert the President, and possibly one
of the Vice-Presidents, of the need to carry out the admissibility check. 556
Footnotes
553
See Carlevaris & Feris, “Running in the Emergency Arbitration Rules: The First Ten Cases” [2014] ICC ICArb. Bull.
Vol.25 No.1, p.25 at s.3(B) in which they note that the President of the ICC Court applied the same standard with respect
to admissibility for an Emergency Arbitration procedure as the ICC Court would use under art.6(4).
554
Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration, para.71. In two other cases, the President allowed the Emergency
Arbitrator Proceedings to continue but not against all parties initially addressed.
555
Article 1(3) of the Rules, which gives the President, and in his absence or otherwise, at the President’s request, also the
Vice-Presidents the power to take urgent decisions on behalf of the ICC Court, is not applicable to the present situation.
556
The Secretariat will make a submission to that effect to the President.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
