Introductory remarks, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406910 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Introductory remarks
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
16-1
Article 16 is intended to allow a rapid transmission of the file by the Secretariat to the Tribunal. 1  Such transmission is made
subject to two conditions: the Tribunal has been constituted and the advance on costs due at that stage has been paid by either
party. The transmission of the file to the Tribunal has consequences that are dealt with elsewhere in the Rules, and that will be
discussed later. In particular, by the time the file is transmitted, the ICC will have decided whether the Expedited Procedure
Provisions are applicable.
16-2
The Tribunal has been constituted when all arbitrators have been confirmed or appointed in accordance with art.13. Pursuant
to art.37(1), a provisional advance on costs is fixed by the Secretary General after receipt of the Request. It is intended to cover
the costs of arbitration for the period until finalisation of the Terms of Reference or until the case management conference for
arbitrations subject to the Expedited Procedure Provisions. 2  Prompt payment can normally be expected from any claimant
eager to move its case forward without undue delay. As a result, the Secretariat is usually in a position to transfer the file to the
Tribunal shortly after the appointment or confirmation of the president or the sole arbitrator. When the latter are confirmed by the
Secretary General pursuant to art.13(2), it is in theory possible to have the file transferred on the very same day to the Tribunal.
16-3
In accordance with art.37(2), a further amount may be (and often is) requested from both parties by way of an advance on
cost, which is, however, fixed by the ICC Court itself. Article 16 provides that the Secretariat will not transmit the file until the
advance on costs requested by the Secretariat has been paid. There is no reference to the “provisional” advance on costs set by the
Secretary General under art.37(1), as art.16 is intended to provide the Secretariat some flexibility as to those advances, if needed.
16-4
When a provisional advance has been fixed pursuant to art.37(1), which is almost always the case, and received by the
Secretariat, it will usually transmit the file as of then to the Tribunal. It will not wait until at least half or even the full amount
of the advance on cost fixed by the ICC Court pursuant to art.37(2) is paid in as well. Rather, in most instances, the advance on
cost is fixed by the ICC Court at the same time the sole arbitrator or presiding arbitrator is appointed or confirmed. In that case,
upon transmitting the file to the Tribunal the Secretariat will provide the parties and the Tribunal with the “Financial Table”,
which contains the amount of the advance fixed by the Court, and the amounts to be paid by the parties, giving claimant credit
for the advance payment already made, and indicating that the remaining amounts will have to be paid following payment
requests of the Secretariat.
Footnotes
1
The 2021 Rules have left art.16 unchanged from the 2017 Rules.
2
See 2021 ICC Note Part VIIA, para.86, Doc.3.1.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
