Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section F. - Hearings
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 6 - Conduct of the Proceedings
Section F. - Hearings
(a)Introduction
6. 162
It has been said that the only thing wrong with ‘documents only’ arbitrations is that there are not enough of them. Such
arbitrations are commonplace in certain categories of domestic arbitrations—notably, in relation to small claims cases. In the
international context, the main examples of ‘documents only’ arbitrations are those conducted under the LMAA Rules in
connection with disputes arising out of charterparties and related documents.
6. 163
However, in mainstream international arbitration, it is unusual for the arbitral proceedings to be concluded without at least a
brief hearing at which the representatives of the parties have an opportunity to make oral submissions to the arbitral tribunal,
and at which the arbitral tribunal itself is able to ask for clarification of matters contained in the written submissions and in
the written evidence of witnesses.
6. 164
All of the rules of the major international arbitration institutions provide for a hearing to take place at the request of either party,
or at the instigation of the arbitral tribunal itself. Whilst an arbitral tribunal must proceed to make its award without a hearing
if the parties have expressly so agreed, 165  such an agreement is rare in modern international arbitration.
(b)Organisation of hearings
6. 165
Hearings are normally held on a date fixed by the arbitral tribunal, either at the request of one or both of the parties, or on its
own initiative. The administrative arrangements may be made by one of the parties, often the claimant, with the agreement of
the other. Alternatively, they may be made by the sole or presiding arbitrator, or by the tribunal secretary (if there is one).
6. 166
In fully administered arbitrations, the institution itself (for example, the AAA or the LCIA) sometimes makes the arrangements;
in others, these matters are left to the arbitral tribunal and the parties. 166
6. 167
The task of organising hearings in a major international arbitration should not be under-estimated nor should the cost. In the
case of a physical hearing, a suitable hearing room must be provided, with ancillary breakout rooms and facilities for the parties
and the arbitral tribunal. Access to printing facilities, and a Wi-Fi connection, are invariably essential. A live transcript and
verbatim record of the proceedings are often considered essential. Accommodation is also required for witnesses, experts, and
the parties’ legal teams. 167  Hearings conducted remotely over video-conference avoid some of these costs. However, the largest
single element of costs associated with an oral hearing—those relating to the time spent by the arbitral tribunal and counsel
on both sides—will still be incurred.

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
6. 168
In short, oral hearings are the most cost-intensive periods of any arbitration and their scheduling often leads to the greatest
delays, because availability of all essential participants must be coordinated. Efforts should therefore be made by arbitrators
and counsel to limit their duration. To this end, the following matters should be considered.
 
•Should there be one hearing or several?
 
•Should there be time limits for the presentation of oral arguments?
 
•Should there be a limit on the time allowed for the examination and re-examination of witnesses?
 
•Should there be post-hearing briefs, rather than oral closing submissions? 168
(i)Location
6. 169
In most cases, physical hearings may be held at any location that is convenient for all concerned. Subject to any mandatory
provisions of law in the seat of the arbitration, there is generally no requirement that all hearings be physically conducted in
the territory of the seat of the arbitration. 169  As a result, most current rules of arbitration permit oral hearings to be conducted
at any location (different from the legal place of arbitration) that the tribunal considers appropriate. 170  While it remains usual
to hold the main physical evidential hearing in the place of arbitration, the option not to do so can, on occasion, bring real
benefits and savings in convenience and cost (for example, when many of the participants in a hearing are all based in another
city), and should be considered in appropriate cases.
(ii)Remote hearings
6. 170
Although remote hearings in international arbitration were not unheard of prior to 2020, they were typically restricted to
hearings on procedural or urgent matters (for example, interim measures). In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and associated
lockdowns and travel restrictions across the world, led to an increasing number of oral hearings being held remotely over
video-conferencing platforms.
6. 171
The shift towards remote hearings during the COVID-19 pandemic was partly facilitated by leading arbitral institutions,
some of which explicitly stated that remote hearings were permissible under their institutional rules. For example, the LCIA
Rules provide that ‘a hearing may take place in person, or virtually by conference call, videoconference or using other
communications technology with participants in one or more geographic places (or in a combined form)’. 171  The ICC has
made it clear that arbitral tribunals possess ‘broad procedural authority under Article 22(2)’, and that this authority extends
to conducting ‘any hearing either by physical attendance or by remote means of communication, such as videoconference
(“virtual hearing”), or both’. 172  Even with the institutions that do not expressly address remote hearings in their rules, there
is consensus that remote hearings are allowed under the broad procedural discretion allocated to arbitral tribunals under most
institutional rules. 173
6. 172
Although remote hearings offer certain advantages, arbitration counsel should assess carefully whether the particular
international arbitration with which they are dealing is best suited to a remote hearing. This is because remote hearings are
not without their drawbacks. Oral advocacy on a video-conference to a generally static, and muted, image may make it more
difficult for the arbitral tribunal and counsel to engage in the substance of complicated arguments. Indeed, a study of US
appellate judges found that judges were less likely to interrupt oral arguments with questions during a remote hearing. 174  The
lack of a courtroom dynamic may also make effective cross-examination more difficult, where it is being conducted remotely

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
and through language interpretation. There are other disadvantages too. Accommodating every participant in a wide variety
of home bases may involve some difficult time-zone jockeying. It is equally easy to imagine circumstances where different
participants in an international arbitration have differing access to technology to allow their participation in a remote hearing.
6. 173
The ICC has identified certain considerations that should be taken into account before an arbitral tribunal decides to hold a
remote hearing, which may be helpful.
The arbitral tribunal must take any decision to hold an evidentiary hearing by remote means of communication
rather than by physical attendance after careful consideration of all relevant circumstances, including the nature
of the hearing, the possible existence of travel constraints, the planned duration of the hearing, the number of
participants and of witnesses and experts to be examined, the size and complexity of the case, the need for
the parties to properly prepare for the hearing, the costs and the gains of efficiency that may be expected by
resorting to virtual means of communication, and whether rescheduling the hearing would entail unwarranted
or excessive delays.
If an arbitral tribunal determines to proceed with a virtual hearing without party agreement, or over party
objection, it should carefully consider the relevant circumstances, including those mentioned in [the prior
paragraph], assess whether the award will be enforceable at law, as provided by Article 42, and provide reasons
for that determination. In making such a determination, arbitral tribunals may take into account their broad
procedural authority under Article 22(2), to, after consulting the parties, adopt such procedural measures as
they consider appropriate, provided that they are not contrary to any agreement of the parties. 175
6. 174
As a result, an arbitral tribunal must consider carefully its decision to hold a remote hearing. Such a decision may be
straightforward in circumstances where both the tribunal and the parties agree on a remote hearing but it is more delicate
where one party insists on having a physical hearing or where, for example, the arbitral tribunal wants a remote hearing but
the parties have agreed on a physical hearing. Ultimately, it is important for the arbitral tribunal to ensure that neither party
has a legitimate ‘due process’ objection to having a remote hearing.
6. 175
Once an arbitral tribunal has determined that it will hold a remote hearing instead of a physical hearing, it must take steps
to ensure equality of arms between the parties. An important consideration to be borne in mind is whether both parties are
going to appear remotely, or if only one party will do so. In the latter case, the CIArb’s Guidance Note on Remote Dispute
Resolution Proceedings advises that ‘in the interests of equality, it is preferable that if one party must appear to the tribunal
remotely, both parties should do so. However, the parties may agree otherwise.’ 176
(iii)Pre-hearing conference
6. 176
In large and complex cases, a properly planned pre-hearing meeting or conference can pay substantial dividends in terms of
saving time and money at the hearing itself. Such conferences should be organised efficiently, both as to timing and content.
The timing is extremely important. If a pre-hearing conference takes place too near to the hearing itself, it will be too late for
the ‘shape’ of the hearing to be influenced. However, if it takes place too early, the arbitral tribunal will almost certainly not
be sufficiently well informed about both the issues, and the evidence needed to supplement the parties’ written submissions,
to enable useful decisions to be taken with regard to the structure of the hearing.
6. 177
Items to be covered at a pre-hearing conference are likely to include the allocation of time as between the parties, the running
order, length, and format of opening statements, whether there is to be sequestration of witnesses, the scope and length of
direct cross-and re-direct examination, whether there are to be oral closing statements and/or post-hearing briefs, arrangement
for transcripts and possibly interpreters, and the preparation of hearing bundles. These matters may be agreed by the parties
or if they cannot agree, be decided by the tribunal, but in any event, they should be recorded in a procedural order.

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
6. 178
For remote hearings, the pre-hearing conference is also an appropriate time for the tribunal and the parties to decide and
agree on the issues unique to such hearings. To that end, in addition to the agenda items discussed above, the following issues
might also be raised for discussion during the pre-hearing conference:
 
(1)The hearing platform to be used (Zoom, Microsoft Teams, WebEx, etc.).
 
(2)Service providers who may be retained to provide remote hearing support.
 
(3)Minimum technical requirements for participating in the remote hearing (for example, a private and stable internet
connection with sufficient bandwidth, camera, microphone, speaker of adequate quality, access to a telephone connection
in case difficulties are encountered using a computer).
 
(4)Online etiquette, including the identification of lead speakers for each day of the hearing, and the permissibility of
using virtual backgrounds (or other screen filters!) during the hearing. 177
 
(5)The cyber-security measures to be adopted.
 
(6)Determining whether the hearing shall be recorded, and if so, whether it should be video-recorded or only audio-
recorded.
 
(7)The dress code for the remote hearing. Although tribunals and courts have made formal attire optional during remote
hearings, some have been careful to specify that counsel must nonetheless be clothed! 178
 
(8)The protocol for the examination of witnesses/experts, which might include measures to ensure that the witness/
expert is not communicating with any other person during the examination, whether the witness/expert may be joined in
the room by an IT assistance, and determining whether a 360o view of the room in which the witness/expert is appearing
is necessary.
 
(9)The manner in which documents and demonstratives will be displayed.
 
(10)The need for scheduling test sessions prior to the hearing to ensure that the remote hearing proceeds as smoothly
as possible.
6. 179
Pre-hearing conferences are a very effective way of ensuring that the hearing itself runs as smoothly as possible, with as
few interruptions for discussion of procedural or administrative issues as can reasonably be expected. The value of such
conferences has been acknowledged by the report of the ICC Commission on Arbitration and ADR Task Force on Reducing
Time and Costs, which has recommended that parties consider ‘organizing a conference with the arbitral tribunal, which may
be by telephone, to discuss the arrangements for any hearing. At such a prehearing conference, held a suitable time before the
hearing itself, the parties and the arbitral tribunal can discuss matters such as time allocation, use of transcripts, translation
issues, order of witnesses and other practical arrangements that will facilitate the smooth conduct of the hearing.’ 179
6. 180
Whether rules provide for oral pre-hearing conferences explicitly or not, 180  they have become common practice in the
exercise of an arbitral tribunal’s general procedural discretion. Indeed, the most proactive tribunals will use them to go beyond
a purely organisational agenda and indicate to the parties issues on which it would like them to focus at the hearing. 181
(c)Procedure at hearings
6. 181

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Individual arbitral tribunals approach the determination of the procedure to be followed at the hearing in different ways. Most
have the common aim of keeping the duration of the hearing to a minimum so far as practicable, in order to assist the busy
schedules of the arbitrators and parties and to reduce expense.
6. 182
Ideas as to what is a reasonable length of time for a hearing differ. Formerly, 182  in English court practice, hearings could last
for many weeks, causing great inconvenience, expense, and exhaustion to all concerned. 183  By contrast, arbitrators from the
civil law countries tend to regard any hearing that takes more than three days as a long one. Although we hear of exceptions, the
general tendency in international arbitration is towards shorter hearings, with greater reliance upon documentary evidence for
the reasons already discussed. This is a necessary step in the interests of economy of time and costs in cases that often involve
arbitrators, lawyers, experts, company executives, and other participants operating away from their home bases.
6. 183
The procedure at a hearing is not fixed in stone. As the UNCITRAL Notes on Organizing Arbitral Proceedings describe:
Arbitration rules typically give broad latitude to the arbitral tribunal to determine the order of presentations at
the hearings. Within that latitude, practices differ, for example, as to whether opening or closing statements are
heard and if they are, their sequence and duration, and which of the parties has the last word. The broad latitude
of the arbitral tribunal also applies to the manner and sequence in which witnesses are heard and to other issues
addressed at any hearing. When several witnesses are to be heard and longer testimony is expected, it is useful to
determine in advance the order in which they will be called. In certain circumstances, it may be desirable to hear
collectively several witnesses on the same subject matter. This is likely to reduce costs and facilitate scheduling.
Each party might be invited to suggest the order in which it proposes to have its own witnesses testify. 184
6. 184
Against the backdrop of procedural freedom, a usual practice (or practices) has emerged in international arbitration that is
described next.
(i)Opening statements
6. 185
The usual practice in international arbitration, given the necessary time limits, is to allocate to each side only a limited opening
statement, in which the advocates assume that the arbitrators have a full knowledge of the written submissions and evidence
that is already on the record. This is followed by the main event: the oral testimony of the witnesses for each party. An English
international arbitrator put it thus:
Finally, since the arbitrators are likely to be busy professional people and often from different countries, the
oral hearings will usually be remarkably short by English standards. Their main purpose is to hear the cross-
examination of the witnesses, bracketed by short opening and closing remarks from both sides, which are often
supplemented by written post-hearing submissions. 185
(ii)Examination of witnesses
6. 186
Although the examination of witnesses owes much to the common law tradition, it has become a standard feature of evidential
hearings in international arbitration. For this reason, witness preparation has become a significant part of hearing preparation
for parties involved in international arbitration and cross-examination has become a key skill for counsel in the conduct of
a hearing.
6. 187

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
Of course, there are important limits in the preparation of witnesses. The role of counsel should be to assist witnesses ‘in
developing the confidence and clarity of thought required to testify truthfully and effectively based upon their own knowledge
or recollection of the facts’. 186  Counsel should not be instructing witnesses to change their evidence. In this regard, the IBA
Guidelines on Party Representation contain advice as to the appropriate limits of such preparation, providing that contact
between counsel and witnesses should not ‘alter the genuineness of the Witness or Expert evidence, which should always
reflect the Witness’s own account of relevant facts, events or circumstances’. 187  It should be borne in mind that being
examined in the ‘witness box’ is, for most witnesses, an unfamiliar and sometimes even intimidating experience. 188  Once the
hearing begins, styles of witness examination vary and tribunals will typically allow counsel some leeway to test the evidence
in the way that they prefer. As a general matter, however, tribunals do not appreciate overly aggressive or discourteous attacks
by counsel. Since being examined in the ‘witness box’ is, for most witnesses, an intimidating experience, an aggressive
comportment by counsel can easily backfire. Experienced arbitrators often discount severe or bullying cross-examinations
on the basis that they are evidence of the self-importance of the cross-examiner rather than the lack of credibility of the
witness. 189
6. 188
Article 8 of the IBA Rules confirms the current international standard generally adopted by international arbitral tribunals:
[ … ]
3.The Arbitral Tribunal shall at all times have complete control over the Evidentiary Hearing. The Arbitral
Tribunal may limit or exclude any question to, answer by or appearance of a witness, if it considers such
question, answer or appearance to be irrelevant, immaterial, unreasonably burdensome, duplicative or
otherwise covered by a reason for objection set forth in Articles 9.2 or 9.3. Questions to a witness during
direct and re-direct testimony may not be unreasonably leading.
4.With respect to oral testimony at an Evidentiary Hearing:
 
(a)the Claimant shall ordinarily first present the testimony of its witnesses, followed by the
Respondent presenting testimony of its witnesses;
 
(b)following direct testimony, any other Party may question such witness, in an order to be
determined by the Arbitral Tribunal. The Party who initially presented the witness shall
subsequently have the opportunity to ask additional questions on the matters raised in the
other Parties’ questioning;
 
(c)thereafter, the Claimant shall ordinarily first present the testimony of its Party-Appointed
Experts, followed by the Respondent presenting the testimony of its Party-Appointed
Experts. The Party who initially presented the Party-Appointed Expert shall subsequently
have the opportunity to ask additional questions on the matters raised in the other Parties’
questioning;
 
(d)the Arbitral Tribunal may question a Tribunal-Appointed Expert, and he or she may be
questioned by the Parties or by any Party-Appointed Expert, on issues raised in the Tribunal-
Appointed Expert Report, in the Parties’ submissions or in the Expert Reports made by the
Party-Appointed Experts;
 
(e)if the arbitration is organised into separate issues or phases (such as jurisdiction, preliminary
determinations, liability and damages), the Parties may agree or the Arbitral Tribunal may
order the scheduling of testimony separately on each issue or phase;
 
(f)the Arbitral Tribunal, upon request of a Party or on its own motion, may vary this order of
proceeding, including the arrangement of testimony by particular issues or in such a manner
that witnesses be questioned at the same time and in confrontation with each other (witness
conferencing);
 
(g)the Arbitral Tribunal may ask questions to a witness at any time.
5.A witness of fact providing testimony shall first affirm, in a manner determined appropriate by the
Arbitral Tribunal, that he or she commits to tell the truth or, in the case of an expert witness, his or her

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
genuine belief in the opinions to be expressed at the Evidentiary Hearing. If the witness has submitted
a Witness Statement or an Expert Report, the witness shall confirm it. The Parties may agree or the
Arbitral Tribunal may order that the Witness Statement or Expert Report shall serve as that witness’s direct
testimony.
6.Subject to the provisions of Articles 9.2 and 9.3, the Arbitral Tribunal may request any person to give
oral or written evidence on any issue that the Arbitral Tribunal considers to be relevant to the case and
material to its outcome. Any witness called and questioned by the Arbitral Tribunal may also be questioned
by the Parties.
6. 189
In the courts of common law countries, elaborate rules of evidence are still deployed even though they were designed for use
in jury trials, which (other than in the United States) are largely used only in criminal cases. Such rules of evidence are not
necessary in the courts of civil law countries because, in general, fact-finding is the responsibility of the judge based on his
or her own enquiries and collection of the evidence. In any event, the civil procedure rules applicable in national courts do
not apply to international arbitrations unless the parties agree otherwise, or the local law at the seat of arbitration provides
that they do apply to international arbitrations held in that country as the juridical seat.
6. 190
Fact `witnesses are usually first ‘examined’ by counsel for the party presenting that witness, then ‘cross-examined’ by counsel
for the other party, then ‘re-examined’ by the first counsel, if necessary. Additional cross-examination may be introduced,
with permission of the arbitral tribunal, where the witness has given new ‘direct’ testimony during the re-examination. 190
6. 191
Arbitral tribunals may sustain objections to direct or redirect examination questions based on characterising them as ‘leading’,
or ‘closed’ (that is, questions that prompt the answer that the examining counsel wishes to obtain). 191  This is not because
there is a binding evidential rule against putting such questions in international arbitration, but because the value of a witness’s
testimony is reduced if it is given pursuant to a question that has suggested the answer. This constraint does not apply to
cross-examining counsel, who may ask any type of question as long as it is fair and relevant to the issues in dispute.
6. 192
Witnesses are sometimes excluded, or ‘sequestered’, until they have given their testimony, although this practice is often
dispensed with, particularly if a witness also happens to be a party representative. Much depends on whether or not a party
is likely to gain an unfair advantage by having a particular witness present while the corresponding witness presented by
the opposing party gives evidence. Fact witnesses are not allowed to discuss the case with any member of the ‘team’,
whether lawyers or other witnesses presented by the same party, during overnight or refreshment breaks whilst they are under
examination. This is an obvious way of ensuring that the witness is not ‘coached’ on how to answer questions during an
examination or re-examination (‘re-direct’). Sometimes, they are permitted to eat meals together, or drink coffee, on the
understanding that the case will not be discussed in his presence. In the case of remote hearings, the arbitral tribunal and the
parties may agree on a set of procedures to ensure that a fact witness is not improperly assisted during a cross-examination. 192
(iii)‘Witness conferencing’
6. 193
An alternative to traditional cross-examination is to put two or more witnesses from each side together to answer questions
from the tribunal. This technique, which was described in the 1999 edition of the IBA Rules as ‘witness confrontation’, is now
better known as ‘witness conferencing’. 193  Where fact witnesses are concerned, it is a somewhat adventurous path for an
arbitral tribunal to take. But, used together with traditional cross-examination, it may provide an effective way of identifying
areas of agreement and disagreement between witnesses. It also offers an opportunity for an immediate and direct comparison
between the witness’s earlier testimony, both in writing and at the hearing.

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
6. 194
In the context of expert witnesses, the practice of ‘witness conferencing’ is much better established. It can be a very effective
way of highlighting the points of agreement and disagreement between the experts, and it often leads, if not to agreement,
then at least to a narrowing of the points of difference—that is, the conflicting expert testimony between which the arbitral
tribunal may have difficulty deciding. 194
6. 195
Where a bridge has collapsed into a river, for example, a fact witness will testify as to what he or she saw and the way in
which the bridge fell, while the expert witness will testify as to what, in his or her opinion, caused the bridge to collapse. Was
it defective design, or defective workmanship or materials? Where the parties’ respective experts disagree, after submitting
lengthy and persuasive expert reports, how is the arbitral tribunal to decide which explanation is more persuasive?
6. 196
The role of experts in this context is to assist, educate, and advise the arbitral tribunal, in a fair and impartial manner, in
specialist fields (such as technical, forensic accountancy, or legal) relevant to specific issues in dispute between the parties in
which (some of) the arbitrators do not themselves have relevant expertise. The result is that arbitral tribunals find themselves
faced with deciding between the opinions of opposing experts who have provided diametrically opposite opinions to questions
such as, ‘why did the bridge fall down?’, 195  with little or no unbiased expert advice to guide them.
6. 197
In an effort to find a practical solution, a number of experienced international arbitrators 196  developed ‘expert conferencing’
techniques instead of, or (more typically) in addition to, traditional cross-examination. In this kind of procedure, either before
or (more commonly) after the experts have drafted their written expert reports, the experts are required to meet and draw up
lists of (a) matters on which they agree, and (b) matters on which they do not agree, and the reasons for their disagreement. 197
6. 198
Based on list (b), the arbitral tribunal prepares an agenda designed to encompass the matters on which the experts are not
agreed, and presents it to the parties and their advocates in advance of the hearing. Then, after all of the fact witnesses from
both sides have been heard and often after the experts have been subject to individual cross-examination, the independent
experts retained by the opposing parties come before the arbitral tribunal, seated alongside each other at the witness table. 198
6. 199
The chairman of the arbitral tribunal then takes the experts through the agenda, item by item. The experts are requested to
explain in their own words the basis for reaching the opinions set out in their written reports and to answer each other’s
main points. They may also be encouraged to debate these points directly with each other if the arbitral tribunal considers
that this would be useful.
(iv)Closing submissions
6. 200
As with opening statements, it is relatively rare in modern international arbitration for lengthy oral submissions to be made
after the witness testimony has been heard. There are two reasons for this. The first relates to time and cost. It has been
noted already that the most expensive phase of an international arbitration is the time during which all of the players must
be gathered in a city that will be foreign to most of them. The accommodation costs are high, but these are dwarfed by the
‘time costs’ of the parties: the tribunal, the parties’ representatives, their counsel, and the witnesses. The second reason is
that it can be challenging, alongside intensive witness examination, for counsel to review quickly and evaluate the transcripts
obtained throughout the hearing, and to craft a closing statement that will deal adequately with the tribunal’s concerns.
6. 201
It is more usual, in modern international arbitrations, for the closing submissions to be in writing, in the form of post-hearing
briefs, delivered after the parties have had the opportunity to review (and, where necessary, correct) the transcripts, within

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
a time for delivery to be agreed between the parties or fixed by the arbitral tribunal. These documents will contain footnote
references to the transcripts of the evidence and are designed to facilitate the drafting of the award.
6. 202
However, this does not exclude the possibility of counsel being permitted to present some form of oral closing statement after
the witness testimony has been heard, if they prefer, or to answer questions from the arbitral tribunal.
(v)Who has the last word?
6. 203
In common law practice, it is the claimant (or ‘plaintiff ’, in some jurisdictions) in a national court that is given the ‘last word’,
on the basis that the claimant bears the burden of proof. In international arbitrations, however, this practice is rarely followed,
since arbitrators tend to feel, instinctively, that due process is generally served only if the respondent has the privilege of
having the last word to balance the claimant’s privilege of going first. Furthermore, the ‘burden of proof ’ point is not wholly
valid, because, in most international arbitrations, the burden falls on each party to prove the facts on which it relies.
(d)Default hearings
6. 204
An arbitral tribunal may, and indeed should, proceed ex parte if one of the parties (almost invariably the respondent) refuses
or fails to appear. In such cases, the arbitral tribunal should proceed with the hearing and issue its award, making sure that the
precise circumstances in which the proceedings have taken place are specified in the award itself. 199
6. 205
This is necessary because it is likely that a party who boycotts an international arbitration intends to resist enforcement of any
award ultimately rendered. Since it is a legitimate ground for refusal of recognition or enforcement of an award, whether under
the New York Convention or otherwise, that a party has not had a reasonable opportunity to present its case, it is desirable that
the award should itself show, on its face, the circumstances in which the respondent did not participate. Two main problems
commonly arise in relation to such ex parte hearings: the first is what constitutes a ‘refusal’ to participate; the second is how
the arbitral tribunal should proceed in such circumstances.
(i)Refusal to participate
6. 206
In some circumstances, the situation is clear. This was so in the three Libyan oil nationalisation cases 200  in which the Libyan
government stated at the outset that it refused to take any part in the proceedings, on the grounds that the arbitral tribunals,
in each case, had no jurisdiction. It will also be clear if a respondent expressly refuses to reply to correspondence from the
arbitral tribunal, or to comply with any procedural directions as to the submission of written pleadings, and so forth.
6. 207
There are two other circumstances in which an arbitral tribunal should proceed ex parte, but these are more difficult to identify.
The first is where a party does not notify its unwillingness to participate, but creates a delay so unreasonable that the arbitral
tribunal (on the application of the other party) would be justified if it were to treat the party in default as having abandoned
its right to present its case. It is impossible to specify precisely when this point arises in any given proceedings and an arbitral
tribunal must use its best judgement, balancing the various factors involved. However, the arbitral tribunal should bear in
mind that it may not be doing the claimant any favours if it accedes too early to an application to proceed ex parte, because
the award may become the subject of a successful challenge when the claimant seeks to enforce it. 201

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
6. 208
The second situation is where a party so disrupts the hearing that it becomes impossible to conduct it in an orderly manner.
Experience of such a situation is hard to find, but theoretically it could happen; the arbitral tribunal would then need to treat
the defaulting party’s conduct as being equivalent to a refusal to participate.
(ii)Procedure in default hearings
6. 209
Unlike a court, an arbitral tribunal has no authority to issue an award akin to a default judgment. Its task is to make a
determination of the disputes submitted to it. Accordingly, even if a party fails to present its case, the arbitral tribunal must
consider the merits and make a determination of the substance of the dispute. Where it is clear from the beginning that a
party (usually the respondent) does not propose to take part, the arbitral tribunal usually ensures that all notifications of
hearings and correspondence continue to be sent to the defaulting party, and that all of the participating party’s submissions
and evidence are placed before the defaulting party in written form. The tribunal will then be justified in holding only a brief
hearing, on an ex parte basis, to review the claims and raise any questions.
6. 210
A reliable guideline as to how such a proceeding should take place is that the party who is taking part must prove its case to
the satisfaction of the arbitral tribunal. The arbitral tribunal has no duty to act as advocate for a party who has elected not to
appear, but it must examine the merits of the arguments of law and fact put to it by the participating party, so as to satisfy
itself that these are well founded. It must then make a reasoned determination of the issues.
6. 211
The practice of arbitral tribunals varies as regards hearings in such situations. Much will depend on the form in which the
written stages of the arbitration have taken place. If the written stages have been comprehensive, the arbitral tribunal may feel
justified in holding a brief and purely formal hearing prior to issuing its award. If, on the other hand, the written pleadings
have been skeletal, formal documents in which only the issues have been defined and no documentary or witness evidence
has been submitted in writing, the arbitral tribunal would probably consider it necessary to hear oral evidence before being
satisfied that the participating party has discharged the burden of proof in relation to its claims (or defences).
6. 212
The Model Law contains a provision empowering the arbitral tribunal to continue the proceedings and to make an award where
a party fails to comply with the requirements of the procedure agreed by the parties or established by the arbitral tribunal. 202
Similar provisions are to be found in modern laws of arbitration, even if they are not directly based on the Model Law.
Footnotes
165
See, e.g., LCIA Rules, Art. 19.1.
166
See UNCITRAL Notes, para. 34. The ICC Secretariat is usually willing to make the necessary arrangements if requested
to do so by the arbitral tribunal.
167
For further discussion of administrative arrangements of an arbitral tribunal, see Chapter 4, paragraphs 4.183 ff.
168
See UNCITRAL Notes, Note 17.
169
In a decision that was widely criticised, the Swedish Svea Court of Appeal held, in Titan Corporation v Alcatel CIT SA,
Case No. RH 2005:1 (T 1038-05) YCA XXX (2005), 139, that Titan Corporation could not request the Swedish courts to
set aside an ICC award in an arbitration in which the seat was Stockholm because the parties had not conducted any of
the hearings in Stockholm (consistent with the discretion to hold hearings other than in the place of arbitration that exists
under the ICC Rules). In 2010, the Supreme Court reversed the decision. See ‘Decision by the Svea Court of Appeal in
Sweden rendered in 2005 Case No. T 1038–05’ (2005) 2 Stockholm Intl Arb Rev 259; Ewerlöf, ‘Chapter 10 application

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
of the New York Convention by Swedish courts’, in Wallin, Regnwaldh, Magnusson, and Franke (eds) International
Arbitration in Sweden: A Practitioner’s Guide (Kluwer Law International, 2013), p. 267, at pp. 270–271.
170
LCIA Rules, Art. 16.3.
171
LCIA Rules, Art. 19.2.
172
ICC, Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration, 1
January 2021. See also ICC Rules, Art. 26.1. The 2020 IBA Rules also expressly address remote hearings. IBA Rules,
Art. 8.2.
173
See, e.g., Maxi Scherer, ‘Remote hearings in international arbitration: An analytical framework’ (2020) 37(4) J Intl
Arb 407. See also SIAC Rules, r. 21.2; SCC Rules, Art. 23.1. Although they are not institutional rules, it is worth noting
that the IBA Rules and the UNCITRAL Notes both expressly recognise that hearings may be held virtually. See IBA
Rules, Art. 8.2; UNCITRAL Notes, para. 122.
174
Dunn and Norwick, ‘Report of a survey of videoconferencing in the courts of appeals’, Federal Judicial Center, 2006,
p. 13, available online at https://www.fjc.gov/sites/default/files/2012/VidConCA.pdf.
175
ICC, Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration, 1
January 2021, paras 99–100.
176
CIArb, Guidance Note on Remote Dispute Resolution Proceedings, Section 1.6.
177
Although some tribunals may allow counsel to use a plain virtual background during the hearing, they are unlikely to
allow any participant to use virtual face filters. See Daniel Victor, ‘I’m not a cat,’ says lawyer having Zoom difficulties,
New York Times, 9 February 2021.
178
See Dorothy Atkins, ‘Judge says Zoom formal attire optional, but clothing a must’, Law360, 29 July 2021; ‘Florida
judge: Get out of bed, get dressed for Zoom hearings’, AP News, 14 April 2020.
179
ICC Commission Report, Techniques for Controlling Time and Costs in Arbitration (2nd edn, 2018), paragraph 37.
180
Only a few do: see WIPO Rules, Art. 47; CIETAC Rules, Art. 33.5.
181
In this regard, see ICC Rules, Appendix IV, para. (g) (‘Case Management Techniques’).
182
Under the English Civil Procedure Rules 1998, however, the length of the hearing is restricted according to the value
or complexity of the case.
183
The oral tradition in England owes its origin to the ‘man who is no longer there’—that is, the juror. Jury trials led
to two inescapable procedural features. First, once started, the oral proceedings had to be completed, because, once
assembled, there was no real practical possibility of reconvening the same jury many weeks, or even months, later.
Secondly, although jurors had to be property owners, there was no guarantee that they were literate; hence the need for
all of the documents to be read aloud at the hearing.
184
UNCITRAL Notes, paras 127–128.
185
Kerr, ‘Concord and conflict in international arbitration’ (1997) 13 Arb Intl 121, at 126–127.
186
Roney, ‘Effective witness preparation for international commercial arbitration: A practical guide for counsel’ (2003)
20 J Intl Arb 429, at 430. This article provides a useful practical six-step guide for the preparation of witnesses.
187
See IBA Guidelines on Party Representation, Guidelines 20–24, and the accompanying commentary.
188
Ibid.
189
Veeder, ‘The 2001 Goff Lecture: The lawyer’s duty to arbitrate in good faith’ (2002) 18 Arb Intl 431, at 445. See also
ICCA Guidelines on Standards of Practice in International Arbitration (2021).
190
Although witnesses ‘shall’ appear ‘for testimony at the Evidentiary Hearing’, the IBA Rules make clear that an
‘Evidentiary Hearing’ includes ‘any hearing [ … ] whether in person, by teleconference, videoconference or other
method’. IBA Rules, Art. 8.1 and Definitions. See also UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 28.4 (‘The arbitral tribunal may direct
that witnesses, including expert witnesses, be examined through means of telecommunication that do not require their
physical presence at the hearing (such as videoconference)’).
191
See IBA Rules, Art. 8.3.
192
See e.g., Seoul Protocol on Video Conferencing in International Arbitration. See also IBA Rules, Art. 8.2 (discussing
the importance of ‘measures to ensure that witnesses giving oral testimony [during a remote hearing] are not properly
influenced or distracted’).
193
See IBA Rules, Art. 8.4.f. It is also more colloquially referred to as ‘hot tubbing’.
194
See Peter, ‘Witness conferencing’ (2002) 18 Arb Intl 47.
195
One side’s expert says, with great conviction, ‘faulty design of the bridge’; equally convincingly, the other side’s expert
says, ‘defective materials used in construction of the bridge’. Cross-examination of experts by counsel is considered
by many international arbitrators to be an inadequate tool to help them to make a determination between the opposing
views of such experts.

Section F. - Hearings, UKBC-REDFERN 530638641 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
196
Notably Peter, ‘Witness conferencing’ (2002) 18 Arb Intl 47.
197
IBA Rules, Art. 5.4. See also the CIArb Protocol for the Use of Party-Appointed Expert Witnesses in International
Arbitration, Arts 6 and 7(2).
198
IBA Rules, Art. 8.4.f.
199
For a discussion of practice under various arbitration rules and national laws, see van den Berg, ‘Preventing delay and
disruption of arbitration’ (1990) 5 ICCA Congress Series 17. See also ICSID Rules, r. 49; UNICTRAL Rules, Art. 30;
Swiss Rules, Art. 30; SCC Rules, Art. 35; ICDR Rules, Art. 29; AAA Rules, Art. 31; HKIAC Rules, Art. 26.
200
The Texaco, BP, and Liamco arbitrations; see Chapter 3, paragraphs 3.163 ff.
201
It is rare, but not unknown, for the respondent to want the proceedings to go ahead, when the claimant has failed to take
them forward, in order to obtain an award that will put an end to the claim. In such a case, similar considerations will
apply: the respondent will require a solid award, capable of being recognised by the courts, if this becomes necessary.
202
Model Law, Art. 25.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
