Case management conference as starting point for..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Case management conference as starting point for time-limit to
render award
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Case management conference as starting point for time-limit to render award
30-58
Pursuant to art.31(1), the time-limit for rendering the final award for ICC cases in general is six months starting from the signing
(or approval) of the Terms of Reference. This time-limit has existed for decades in the ICC Rules, although in practice it is
very rarely met. 673  It is in fact a default time-limit, with the ICC Court fixing a different time-limit based on the procedural
timetable established pursuant to art.24(2).
30-59
Article 4(1) of App.VI has kept the same six-month time limit for rendering the final award, but makes it start from the date
of the case management conference rather than the date of the signature (or approval) of the Terms of Reference. The case
management conference is to be held within 15 days following the transmission of the file to the Tribunal. Thus, at first sight,
there seems to exist very little difference between the expedited and the standard rules. However, for cases under the Expedited
Procedure Provisions, the ICC Secretariat and ICC Court seek to enforce the six-month time limit strictly, i.e. “to be effectively
complied with, with no need for extensions.” 674  The 2021 ICC Note expressly states that the “Court considers that compliance
with such time limit is of essence under the Expedited Procedural Rules”. It even promises an increase of the arbitrator’s fees
above the amount that it would otherwise consider fixing, when the Tribunal “has conducted the arbitration expeditiously”. 675
The Court also “expects arbitral tribunals acting under the Expedited Procedure Provisions to conduct the procedure in such
way as to comply with [the six-month] deadline, with no need for extension”.
30-60
It is with this “no need for extensions” philosophy that the Tribunal will have to approach the conduct of the proceedings. In
other words, its procedural timetable must be compatible with the six-month timeframe. If a hearing date is set for instance two
weeks after the last written submission, the parties will have to make themselves available, whether it suits them or not, and the
sole arbitrator will be expected to enforce the date set. But here again, party autonomy will prevail at the end. If both parties
agree that they require more time, the ICC Court will have no basis to interfere, and the sole arbitrator may be left to express
regret over the delay, but will have not much difficulty in submitting a reasoned request for extension to the court.
30-61
Providing for the usual steps in an ICC arbitration in a six-month time-period has always been a challenge, first and foremost for
parties and their counsel. If one adds the possibility of procedural difficulties (e.g., disputes over the language of the arbitration,
jurisdictional challenges, or even challenges of an arbitrator), a party’s request to appoint an expert or to conduct a site inspection
pursuant to art.25(4) of the ICC Rules, or simply the parties’ lack of cooperation, 676  the six-month time limit may easily be at
risk. While this risk will materialise whenever an interim or partial award is required, requests for bifurcation of the proceedings
are unlikely to succeed when the Expedited Procedure Provisions apply, and in any event rare in “small” claim cases, except
as regards jurisdictional issues.
30-62
Finally, the time needed by the Tribunal to draft the award and submit it for scrutiny by the ICC Court, will have to be
integrated into the timetable. 677  The ICC Court expects the Tribunal “to submit its draft award within five months from the
case management conference”. This justifies limiting the scope of the award to its truly essential elements. As stated in the
2021 ICC Note:

Case management conference as starting point for..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
“151. Any award under the Expedited Procedure Provisions must be reasoned. In such arbitrations, it is particularly
appropriate to keep the factual and/or procedural sections of the award to what the arbitral tribunal considers
necessary for the understanding of the award, and state the reasons of the award in as concise a fashion as possible.”
30-63
Thus, realistically speaking, there will be approximately 4–5 months to conduct the proceedings from the time of the first case
management conference until the proceedings are closed. As mentioned, in some cases, one can expect that there will be only
one written submission per party following the case management conference. However, in the authors’ experience it is possible
to organize reply submissions on a reasonably tight time frame.
Footnotes
673
This probably explains why the ICC does not publish statistical data in that respect. The average duration of ICC
arbitration is said to be 2.4 years, but that figure is not very meaningful, see ICC 2020 Statistics, p.19.
674
2021 ICC Note, para.150, Part VII G, Doc.3.1. This is not to say, that efforts have been made by the ICC to become
much stricter, notably with arbitrators when it comes to the time for handing in their draft award to the ICC Court, but
also as regards delays in the scrutiny process due to the court itself, see 2021 ICC Note, Doc.3.1.
675
2021 ICC Note, para.160.
676
This will require, more than ever, that the arbitral tribunal starts preparing the award from early on and integrates the
parties’ submissions as they are being made, see Rohner, op. cit., at p.63.
677
Over the years, the ICC Court has contributed to its awards becoming longer, by imposing requirements as to what
arbitrators should include in awards.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
