Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 2 - Negotiation
A Practical Guide to Effective Dispute Resolution: Methods & Clauses 1st Ed.
Mainwork
Part 1 - Non-binding Dispute Resolution Methods and Escalation Clauses
Chapter 2 - Negotiation
Overview
2-001
It is an accepted (but difficult to confirm) fact that around 80–90% of commercial disputes that start with court proceedings end
up being settled out of court through some form of negotiation. 1
With a dispute having been identified, prior to either party commencing an attempt to negotiate, it is typical for the aggrieved
party to prepare the basis for their claim by gathering information about the cause of the dispute, assessing the strengths of their
position and their legal options, identifying their interests and goals, and considering their objectives, including an opening
settlement proposal.
At this stage, it is quite common for the party seeking compensation not to have considered any form of strategy or potential
compromise but simply to set out what it considers amounts to full compensation for their loss. This simple “single value”
compensation approach to negotiation can serve to move the parties’ attention away from other potentially optimum outcomes
that consider the future mutual benefit of continuing the business relationship. In turn, this can serve to push the parties into the
sub-optimal position of polarised, adversarial engagement, rather than the more desirable collaborative constructive approach
that underpins effective dispute solution.
Factors affecting prospects of success in negotiation
2-002
In an ideal world, for negotiation to be successful, both parties should have considered their positions, concerns and desired
outcomes. The prospects of success in negotiation are greatly increased if there is a mutual benefit to the parties continuing
with their commercial relationship in some form. It follows that if one or other party has zero interest in working with the other
going forward, and their goal is to achieve a final resolution of the dispute and then walk away, the prospects for a successful
negotiation reduce.
A significant reason for failure to reach a settlement through negotiation includes the parties having incompatible interests with
little or no interest in reaching a mutually beneficial solution. This can be compounded if there is a breakdown in communication
or a lack of trust, which can lead to misunderstandings, posturing, misinterpretation and/or an unwillingness to listen.
If either party adopts a rigid position and refuses to explore underlying interests or consider alternative solutions, it can become
increasingly difficult to find the common ground that is essential for a mutually beneficial negotiated solution.
Another common factor that can impede settlement is a perceived power imbalance, where one party sees themselves as
holding significantly more power or leverage over the other. This can create an uneven negotiation dynamic that will hinder the
achievement of a fair and balanced settlement. In turn, this can increase the risk that polarising emotional factors such as anger,
resentment or fear, will impede rational decision making and make it difficult for both parties to move forward.
Anticipating these impediments to reaching a negotiated solution, a provision can be made for pre-dispute negotiations to be
included in the contract. The ultimate goal of such a clause is to encourage the parties to come together at an early stage to agree

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
a more amicable resolution. By doing this, the clause provides the parties with balanced control over a dispute which, in turn,
can enable the parties to mend commercial bridges and continue in a mutually beneficial commercial relationship.
This may seem an obvious and natural thing for the parties to do but, in order to develop the requirements of such a negotiation
clause, it is useful to further understand why such a clause is advisable and why contract drafters should not assume that the
parties will rely on business common sense.
Expanding on the practical manifestations of the problems identified above, the reasons why the parties may start by negotiating
but quickly move to litigation or arbitration include:
 
• layers of senior management who fail to deal with minor skirmishes pragmatically, often inadvertently encouraged by
in-house legal advisors or litigious lawyers;
 
• imbalanced contracts where one party perceives themselves to be in a stronger position and often overestimates their
prospects of success;
 
• a defensive psychological or emotional response where a breach may clearly be the fault of one party, but that party
cannot (or is not allowed to) accept that it is their fault; and
 
• cultural recalcitrance in organisations, particularly state-owned enterprises engaged in commercial disputes, where
business is seen as a battleground and an environment where concessions or compromise can lead to career failure.
Objective of a negotiation clause
2-003
The objective of a negotiation clause is to try and cut through any inbuilt resistance to negotiation and force a high-level review
of the dispute with a view to settling it, or at least narrowing the issues in dispute, before an arbitration clause (or litigation
proceedings) is activated. Contractual negotiation clauses are used to escalate the dispute to a higher level of management within
the respective parties in order to try to distance it from the potential influence of the responsible business unit and, in so doing,
to de-escalate any tensions between the parties.
In order to maximise the overall effectiveness of the dispute resolution process, if attempts at negotiation fail, it is strongly
recommended that the parties agree to record the areas of agreement and identify the remaining gaps or issues to be resolved.
Whether the next stage is non-binding (e.g. mediation) or binding (e.g. arbitration), a mutual record of the remaining issues in
dispute can greatly improve the efficiency of the subsequent dispute resolution procedures and, by shining a light on the issues
in dispute, can still lead to further offers to settle even after the formal negotiation has ended.
Where areas of agreement involve parties having made commercial concessions, such a record of agreement would require the
consent of the conceding party before it is disclosed to an arbitral tribunal.
Linking the negotiations to other forms of dispute resolution
2-004
In general, it is not possible to have a legally binding clause that simply requires a negotiation to be successful (“an agreement
to agree”). In the event of failure, a single-stage negotiation clause must ultimately lead to, or allow for, a determinative final
stage in the proceedings, being arbitration or litigation. Without this, the clause will be unenforceable and meaningless in the
face of an uncooperative party.
However, in the interests of avoiding the costs and time associated with arbitration or litigation, it is possible for a negotiation
clause to lead to a second stage of dispute resolution process, such as early neutral evaluation (ENE) or mediation.

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
The fundamental difference between negotiation and mediation is the formal involvement of an independent third party. If the
parties have made some progress but reached a deadlock in negotiation, there is potentially a lot of value in agreeing an ENE
stage prior to mediation. In a lot of disputes, the benefit of this is that having a truly independent, experienced and respected
third party assessing the relative merits of the parties’ positions can help facilitate the parties to adjust their positions and reach
agreement.
There are many examples of institutional multi-tier dispute resolution clauses online and a list of these is provided in Appendix
Two. A common element is how the dispute resolution method progresses to the next stage with a key element being a clear
trigger (normally time) that determines when and how the dispute resolution process can be moved on at the discretion of either
party, if they conclude that negotiation is not likely to succeed or, at least, not likely to succeed in an acceptable timeframe.
Summary of key principles
2-005
The key principles for a legally binding negotiation clause can be summarised as: 2
 
(a)The agreement must create an enforceable obligation requiring the parties to engage in an alternative dispute resolution.
 
(b)The obligation must be expressed clearly as a condition precedent to court proceedings or arbitration.
 
(c)The dispute resolution process must be sufficiently clear and certain by reference to objective criteria. If there is
escalation to meditation, this should include the machinery to appoint a mediator or determine any other necessary step in
the procedure without the requirement for any further agreement by the parties.
 
(d)Depending on jurisdiction, a court would typically have discretion to stay proceedings commenced in breach of an
enforceable dispute resolution agreement. In considering any application, the court should have regard to the public policy
interest in upholding the parties’ commercial agreement and furthering the overriding objective in assisting the parties to
resolve their disputes.
Essential features of an effective escalating negotiation clause
2-006
Tiered negotiation clauses are not boilerplate—they should always be drafted with reference to the particular circumstances
of the transaction.
A potential downside to negotiation as a mandatory first step is that either party could decide to drag their heels and delay
the negotiation to the detriment of the opposing party. This downside can be minimised by specifying the duration of this step
before resort to arbitration is permitted or a second stage of the process commences.
There is a debate about the minimum duration of the negotiation phase before either party can move the process on to the next
non-binding stage or to the final stage of arbitration or litigation. A common concern is that if it is too long, and one of the parties
deliberately drags their heels or refuses to negotiate, the only effect is to increase frustration and, potentially, the commercial
damage as a result of the dispute continuing.
As such, although it may be counter-intuitive, it is better to have a shorter period of time to force the parties to engage quickly.
If the negotiation is successful or starts to progress, the parties can mutually agree to extend the period. In contrast, if there is
no progress, or an obvious lack of engagement, the negotiation stage can be brought to an end and the next stage commenced.
A reasonable short period could be as little as 14 days as this should be enough time for parties to start, if they are serious about
reaching a negotiated settlement. A period of 30 days would be considered normal, and a period of 60 days would probably be
the longest period with any additional justification depending on the circumstances.

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
If a longer period is chosen, given the embedded delay, the parties should consider whether there are likely to be any
circumstances that might justify either party seeking urgent relief that could not wait for the negotiation escalation process to
end. Given that it would depend on the nature of the contract and the activities of the parties, it would be difficult to attempt
to draft an escalation clause with a generic “escape hatch” but such wording could allow an assessment by the arbitral tribunal
regarding whether the urgency was reasonable or fair in all the circumstances.
As such, it could arguably be provocative during the contract drafting stage to reject a proposal by the other party for negotiation
as a mandatory first step. One way to enhance the benefit of mandatory negotiation is to require that the negotiation be
conducted by executives not involved in the performance of the contract, however, in some circumstances, such designations
are impracticable. Examples of such circumstances would include where a higher executive may lack enough knowledge of
the project’s history or technical complexities to reach an effective resolution. In addition, finding senior executives who are
completely removed from the contract and are available for negotiations can pose logistical and time-commitment challenges.
In summary, to be effective, a negotiation clause should define:
 
• a trigger for the negotiation process to start;
 
• a clear process;
 
• a time frame (beginning and end);
 
• easily identifiable decision makers with authority;
 
• a clear statement as to what will happen if negotiations fail.
The need for a “trigger”
2-007
To be legally effective in most jurisdictions, a negotiation clause should provide for a “trigger” to activate the clause, followed
by a “process” stage requiring the parties to take unambiguous steps to try and negotiate a solution. However, advice should be
taken regarding the law governing the arbitration agreement 3  to determine whether there is anything specific about the wording
of the escalation obligation (see Chapter Two).
The reason for involving a process that ultimately leads to a binding stage is to reduce the risk of parties, who are actively
involved in the dispute, inadvertently polarising their positions during the procedural negotiations as both will recognise that,
if they cannot reach agreement, the dispute resolution process will be moved to another stage.
Whilst it is not possible to force a party to negotiate, a good negotiation clause should move the dispute up a level in the
organisation to senior parties who are ideally one-step removed from the day-to-day issues behind the dispute, which can lead to
entrenched positions being taken. It is important that these senior parties have authority and are best placed to be able to see the
bigger picture and to embrace the benefits of avoiding proceedings (arbitration or litigation) and maintaining business relations.
The principle here is that the selected person at this more senior level should be able to take a longer-term view of the benefits
of an out-of-court settlement whilst being less influenced by the potentially instinctive resistance of the lower-level individuals
within a party, who may fear that compromise or loss could impact on their career or bonuses. It is ideally best to move the dispute
to a level above that of the immediate management of the parties directly involved in the dispute, but a practical consideration
will clearly be the size and structure of the organisation within each party.
As mentioned above, there should be a finite timescale to give the negotiations time to iterate through several offers before
concluding that there is no prospect of resolving the dispute through negotiation. The downside of setting a mandatory time
period is that, unless both agree, the parties will be required to attempt negotiation for that period before arbitration can be
commenced even if it is plain that there is no chance of negotiations succeeding. This can be mitigated by setting a short period.
Whilst this delay may result in one party getting frustrated, a potential delay of 30–60 days (or whatever is agreed) should be
considered in the context of the likely duration if litigation had been followed (or even once arbitration is commenced) against

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
the potential benefits of maximising the prospect of an out-of-court settlement. Having said that, the mandatory timing is not a
problem if both parties acknowledge that the disputed “gap” is too large to be bridged through negotiation as the requirement
can be waived by mutual agreement.
Examples of effective clauses and commentary
2-008
There are many generic “standard” clauses, which can be found with reference to institutions, including the International Centre
for Dispute Resolution (ICDR), the London Court of International Arbitration (LCIA), the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators
(CIArb), and the London Centre for Arbitration and Mediation (LCAM). Examples of template clauses can also be found in
independent reference texts. Appendix Two contains examples of escalation clauses sourced from institutions and separate
reference texts. These are useful in serving to illustrate simple effective clauses with different emphases but, as explained below
in the commentary, some elements may be missed in each illustration that may be important depending on circumstances.
After comparing elements of publicly available templates below, a comprehensive template is provided that can be used as part
of a tiered approach to a dispute resolution clause with any optional elements shown in square brackets [ ].
Scope of clause
2-009
An effective escalation clause should ensure that it is clear what types of disputes are required to be resolved according to the
stages set out in the clause. The starting point is that wording needs to be broad enough to capture all material disputes that
may arise through the operation of the relevant contract. It is also possible for the parties to agree to carve out specific disputes
that may be regarded as being best resolved, for example, through expert determination or by reference to an industry specific
dispute review board (DRB).
A comparison of a selection of institutional clauses shows very similar wording to define the scope of the dispute resolution
clause:
ICDR: “In the event of any controversy or claim arising out of or relating to this contract, or a breach
thereof…” 4
LCIA: “In the event of a dispute arising out of or relating to this contract, including any question regarding
its existence, validity or termination…” 5
CIArb: “The parties shall attempt to resolve any dispute arising out of or relating to this contract…” 6
LCAM: “If a dispute arises out of or in connection with this agreement or the performance, validity or
enforceability of it (Dispute), then the parties shall follow the procedure set out in this clause.” 7

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
SIAC: “Any dispute arising out of or in connection with this contract, including any question regarding its
existence, validity or termination, shall be…” 8
ICC: “All disputes arising out of or in connection with the present contract shall be finally settled…” 9
Born: “The parties shall use their best efforts to resolve all disputes relating to this Agreement by…” 10
Friedland: “The parties shall endeavour to resolve any dispute arising out of or in connection with this
agreement or the breach, termination or validity thereof…” 11
Requirement to negotiate
2-010
A comparison of the wording setting out the requirement to negotiate identifies some common elements but also differences
between the different institutions.
ICDR: “… the parties hereto shall consult and negotiate with each other and, recognizing their mutual
interests, attempt to reach a satisfactory solution.”
LCIA: “… the parties shall first seek settlement of that dispute by negotiation between the parties. Either
party may serve a Dispute Notice on the other. Within […] days of the date of service of that Dispute Notice,
each party will nominate [a director] to meet to discuss the dispute and explore settlement. That meeting
will take place within […] days of the Dispute Notice.”
CIArb: “The parties shall attempt to resolve any dispute […] through negotiations between senior executives
of the parties, who have authority to settle the same.”
LCAM: “Either party shall give to the other written notice of the Dispute, setting out its nature and full
particulars (Dispute Notice), together with relevant supporting documents. The parties will attempt, in good
faith, to resolve the Dispute promptly through negotiation between the respective senior executives of the
parties who have authority to settle.”

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
FRIEDLAND “The parties shall seek amicably to settle all disputes arising out of or in connection with
this Agreement by negotiation. If, within [30] days after written notice by either party of the existence of a
dispute, the parties do not resolve such dispute, then the dispute shall be referred to [(e.g., chief executive
officers)] from each party] for further negotiation.”
BORN: “The parties shall use their best efforts to resolve all disputes relating to this Agreement by amicable
negotiations. If either party gives notice to the other party that a dispute has arisen, and the parties are unable
within thirty (30) days of such notice to resolve the dispute, then it shall be referred to [the Vice-President
for Sales] of Seller and [the Vice-President for Quality Control] of Buyer. If these officers are unable within
[thirty (30) days] to resolve the dispute, then it shall be referred to the [Chief Executive Officers] of Seller
and Buyer.
Distinctive elements that increase the prospects for effective negotiation are:
 
(a)a requirement to serve a dispute notice setting out the nature of the dispute with full particulars, including supporting
documents;
 
(b)a requirement to involve a senior executive/director in the negotiations who has the authority to settle the agreement.
This can either be at the first stage of negotiation or if the first stage fails to reach agreement;
 
(c)an agreement to negotiate amicably or in good faith.
Escalation if negotiation fails
2-011
In the institutional examples below, a common factor is that escalation from a failed negotiation stage is after a period of time
of between 30–60 days and the trigger is pressed by one party serving notice on the other party that they wish to escalate. The
escalation can either be to a further non-binding stage (typically mediation) or directly to a final binding stage of arbitration:
ICDR: “If they do not reach settlement within a period of 60 days, then, upon notice by any party to the
other(s), any unresolved controversy or claim shall be settled by arbitration”
LCIA: “…If the dispute is not resolved within […] days of the negotiation meeting, the parties shall seek
settlement of the dispute by mediation…”
CIArb: “If the matter is not resolved by negotiation within 30 days of receipt of a written ‘invitation to
negotiate’, the parties will attempt to resolve the dispute in good faith through an agreed Alternative Dispute
Resolution (ADR) procedure, or in default of agreement, through an ADR procedure as recommended to the
parties by the President or the Vice President, for the time being, of the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators”

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
LCAM: “If those senior executives are, for any reason, unable to resolve the Dispute as a result of negotiation
within [30] days, the dispute shall be referred to mediation in accordance with the London Chamber of
Arbitration and Mediation (‘LCAM’) Model Mediation Procedures. Unless otherwise agreed between the
parties, the mediation will start not later than [30] days after the date of the Dispute Notice. If the dispute
is not resolved within [30] days of the Dispute Notice, the Dispute shall be finally resolved by arbitration
in accordance with…”
FRIEDLAND: “Any dispute arising out of or in connection with this agreement or the breach, termination
or validity thereof, which remains unresolved [30] days after either party gives written notice of the existence
of such dispute, shall be settled by arbitration”
or
“If the parties do not resolve their dispute within (60] days of written notice by either party of the existence
of a dispute, then all disputes shall be finally settled by arbitration administered by the [arbitral institution]”
BORN: “If such representatives are unable to resolve any dispute(s) referred to them within [30] days of
referral, either party may submit such dispute(s) to arbitration in accordance with the provisions of Article
[X] hereof.”
or
“If the [Chief Executive Officers of Seller and Buyer] are unable within [thirty (30) days] to resolve the
dispute, then either party may submit the dispute to arbitration in accordance with the provisions of Article
[X] hereof.
or [Multi Step]
If the dispute has not been resolved by negotiation as provided herein within [45] days after delivery of the
initial notice of negotiation, [or if the parties failed to meet within [20] days,] the parties shall endeavour to
settle the dispute by mediation under the International Institute for Conflict Prevention & Resolution (‘CPR’)
Mediation Procedure [currently in effect OR in effect on the date of this Agreement], [provided, however, that
if one party fails to participate in the negotiation as provided herein, the other party can initiate mediation
prior to the expiration of the [45] days.]
As already explained, in formulating the wording of the escalation stage, a key decision will be how long is left before a party
has the right to escalate. The better wording is that a party “may” rather than “must” as this allows the parties to accept an
overrun in time if they wish to continue negotiating for whatever reason.

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
For this part of the clause to be effective, there must be a path to reach a final binding stage, if either party wishes to do that.
The wording used by Born is distinctive in that it sets one timescale (e.g. 45 days) for the duration of the negotiation but also
introduces a shorter timescale (e.g. 20 days) which, if a party has effectively refused to engage or participate in the negotiation,
the other party can move to the non-binding mediation stage or directly to the binding arbitration stage.
General comments
2-012
As a general rule, there is merit in keeping the clause as simple as possible and, even if there is no escalation stage, the clause
should serve as a reminder to the parties that they should try and acknowledge each other’s mutual interests and to reach
agreement. However, if there is no escalation stage, either to a different level in the organisation or to a second stage of mediation,
then the majority of the potential threats to the prospects of a negotiated settlement remain.
A clause that simply serves the purpose of inserting a negotiation stage prior to moving to a second non-binding stage (being
mediation) does nothing much to try and improve the prospects of a successful negotiation or to address any of the psychological
barriers to settlement.
Whilst the required content of a dispute notice is likely to be defined in the contractual definitions section as containing a
statement of the issues in dispute, the effectiveness of the dispute resolution process is significantly improved if it is specified
that the dispute notice be updated at the end of a failed negotiation to record any agreements that had been reached during
negotiation and the issues that remained in dispute.
Preparation for drafting the clauses
2-013
It is important for any relevant clause to have a broad enough scope to capture any material dispute but, to avoid satellite
litigation, whatever wording is agreed, it is important that both parties have the same understanding. Before drafting the
negotiation clause, the following questions should be considered:
(a) What disputes should the negotiation clause cover?
This can be considered with reference to gateways or triggers including possible threshold criteria such as a threshold value
before the clause is triggered or breaches of particular sections of the agreement. Before including a specific quantum as
a threshold, careful consideration should be carried out to avoid wording that could lead to a future dispute about whether
such a threshold has been crossed.
By way of illustration of the problem, if a value is included as the threshold, there is a risk that it may not be possible to place
a precise value on a dispute at an early stage or the value of the dispute itself could be disputed. The intention here should be
to avoid disproportionality between the resolution mechanism proposed and the quantum or nature of dispute.
In any event, if the negotiation clause precedes a subsequent arbitration stage, there should be no incompatibility between
a negotiation threshold and the triggering of the arbitration clause itself. There should also be no threshold on the right to
commence arbitration, as this could potentially leave some disputes outside any dispute resolution mechanism.

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
(b) How much time do the parties accept as being reasonable between a decision to
trigger the negotiation clause and the option of serving a notice of arbitration being
available?
In the event of a dispute being identified, there is always the risk that one party may want to delay (or even try and avoid)
the activation of an arbitration clause. The effect of imposing a minimum time window for negotiation is to reduce this.
It is not uncommon to allow several months for this stage. In making that decision, parties should be aware that in the event
of a dispute, which is intrinsically unresolvable through negotiation, this built-in delay may turn out to be frustrating and/or
financially costly. Such types of disputes include a clear and deliberate wilful breach of a condition or where time is important,
for example, in a deadlock situation in the context of managing the business of a joint venture.
It can be a good idea to introduce an acceleration element (as per Born), as it is likely to become clear quite quickly if a party
is not prepared to engage in negotiation or is attempting to delay arbitration/litigation for strategic purposes.
(c) What level of management should the nominated negotiator be specified as leading
the negotiation?
The aim here is to identify a level of management that is above the level of the dispute in the hope that they will be able to
see the bigger picture and be willing to compromise in order to maintain business relations. If this level is too high, then the
negotiator may lack the necessary granularity of knowledge required to negotiate. If the level is too low, then the negotiator
may be too close to the problem to be able to step back and see the bigger picture. There may be practical difficulties if
the parties are different size organisations but, in order to maximise the prospects for effective engagement, the nominated
negotiators should ideally be equally matched with regard to their respective authorities and seniority.
Whatever wording is used to specify the nominated negotiator, the parties should be able to apply that definition at the time of
entering into the agreement in order to make sure that it is clear enough to be able to identify a named individual or individuals
who may be in the relevant senior role at the time of agreeing the contract. The final agreement should not include specifically
named individuals as they may be unable to participate at the time of a future dispute.
Suggested comprehensive template
2-014
“In the event of a dispute arising out of or relating to this contract [OPTIONAL INCLUSION OF A
THRESHOLD], including any question regarding its existence, validity or termination, the parties shall first
seek settlement of that dispute by negotiation between the parties.
Before starting [litigation/arbitration] proceedings, a party shall serve an Invitation to Negotiate, containing
details of the background to the dispute and the issues to be resolved on the other. Within […] days of the date
of service of that Invitation to Negotiate, each party will nominate [a named director or role], the Nominated
Negotiator, with authority to negotiate and agree how to resolve the dispute.

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
The Nominated Negotiators will discuss the dispute and attempt to narrow the issues and explore settlement
(the Negotiation Meeting). That first meeting will take place within […] days of the Invitation to Negotiate.
[OPTIONAL TERM TO ALLOW EARLY MOVE TO BINDING STAGE:
If one of the parties effectively refuses to participate in the negotiation [20 days after service of the Invitation
to Negotiate], the other party may [initiate mediation according to clause [x] below] OR [commence
arbitration in accordance with clause [y] below].
If the parties fail to settle the dispute through negotiation, a mutual record shall be made of the outstanding
issues in dispute and any issues from the original dispute that have been agreed.
[OPTIONAL MEDIATION: If the dispute is not resolved within […] days of the Negotiation Meeting, the
parties shall seek settlement of the dispute by mediation in accordance with the [(named institution)] Rules,
which Rules are deemed to be incorporated by reference into this clause.
If the matter has not been resolved by a negotiation or other dispute resolution procedure in accordance with
this clause within […] days of the initiation of that procedure, the dispute may be referred to arbitration by
any party in accordance with the [arbitration] clause [X] of this contract.”
Enforceability of a negotiation clause
2-015
When drafting negotiation clauses to resolve disputes, care needs to be taken to ensure that the clause is enforceable. Drafters
should take into account that common law and civil law jurisdictions have significant differences in their approach and to
consider the requirements of the law governing the arbitration agreement.
A major difference between civil and common law jurisdictions is the approach to a duty to act in good faith. In many civil law
jurisdictions, there is a codified obligation to act in good faith in the performance and enforcement of a contract. In contrast,
under English law and most other common law jurisdictions, there is no equivalent duty of good faith and an agreement to act
in good faith would be largely unenforceable.
Specific issues relating to the enforceability of a negotiation clause include:
 
(a)A simple “agreement to negotiate” is akin to an “agreement to agree” and is unenforceable in most jurisdictions for
lack of certainty. 12

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
 
(b)Any attempt to impose an obligation to resolve a dispute “amicably” is unworkable in practice, as it overlooks that, to get
to the stage where arbitration or litigation is considered, 13  it is likely that the parties’ relationships are no longer “amicable”.
Whilst it can be argued that a “best endeavours” clause is akin to a “good faith” clause, English courts have maintained
their position that a duty to negotiate is unenforceable, as either party is entitled to withdraw from the negotiations at any
time and for any reason and there can be no obligation to negotiate until there is a “proper reason”. 14
 
(c)Despite raising practical questions, a dispute resolution clause in a contract, which required the parties to seek to resolve
a dispute by friendly discussions in good faith, and within a limited period of time, before the dispute could be referred
to arbitration, was found to be enforceable. 15  However, there is a possibility that a court could still find that this is too
nebulous. 16
 
(d)Given the uncertainty around enforceability, the best way to consider this obligation for a mandatory negotiation period
before arbitration commences is as being a reminder to both parties of their agreement to try and resolve without going to
court and to consider it as an attempt to provide a “cooling off” period before arbitration commences. At worst, even if
one party refused to actively engage in negotiation, or argued that this duty was not enforceable, an arbitrator could still
refuse to accept jurisdiction if the mandatory time period had not elapsed.
 
(e)Where negotiation (or mediation) procedures are clearly set out in an agreement, English courts will enforce them 17
provided that there is:
 
o a sufficiently certain process that can be followed with needing an “agreement to agree”;
 
o a defined process for selecting the party (or parties) to resolve the commercial dispute;
 
o details of the procedure to be followed.
Footnotes
1
John R. Allison, “Five Ways to Keep Disputes Out of Court” (January–February 1990), Harvard Business Review;
Jackson LJ, Review of Civil Litigation Costs: Final Report (London: TSO, 2009), Ch.36 ‘Alternative dispute resolution’,
s.1.5.
2
Ohpen Operations UK Ltd v Invesco Fund Managers Ltd [2019] EWHC 2246 (TCC); [2019] B.L.R. 576 at [32], per
O’Farrell J.
3
Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v OOO Insurance Company Chubb [2020] UKSC 38; [2020] 1 W.L.R. 4117.
4
ICDR, Guide to Drafting International Dispute Resolution Clauses, https://www.icdr.org/sites/default/files/
document_repository/ICDR_Guide_Drafting_Clauses.pdf.
5
LCIA, Guide to Drafting International Dispute Resolution Clauses, https://www.lcia.org/Dispute_Resolution_Services/
LCIA_Mediation_Clauses.aspx.
6
CIArb, – Dispute Resolution Clauses – “Catch All” Dispute Resolution Clause, https://www.ciarb.org/media/
tb0bmmsm/6-contract-clause.pdf.
7
LCAM, Model Contract Clauses (as at August 2024) https://lcam.org.uk/model-contract-clauses/.
8
Singapore International Arbitration Centre (SIAC), Model Clause (revised as of 12 January 2023).
9
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), Standard ICC Arbitration Clauses (as at August 2024) https://iccwbo.org/
news-publications/arbitration-adr-rules-and-tools/standard-icc-arbitration-clauses-english-version/.
10
G.B. Born, International Arbitration and Forum Selection Agreements, Drafting and Enforcing, 6th edn (The
Netherlands: Kluwer Law International BV, 2021), Ch.3, pp.8–9.
11
P.D. Friedland, Arbitration Clauses for International Contracts, 2nd edn (New York: JurisNet LLC, 2007), Ch.7.
12
Walford v Miles [1992] 2 A.C. 128 at 138G; [1992] 2 W.L.R. 174 HL.
13
Itex Shipping Pte v China Ocean Shipping Co (The Jing Hong Hai) [1989] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 522 QBD.
14
Walford v Miles [1992] 2 A.C. 128 at 138G.

Chapter 2 - Negotiation, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291541 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
15
Emirates Trading Agency LLC v Prime Mineral Exports Private Ltd [2014] EWHC 2104 (Comm); [2015] 1 W.L.R. 1145.
16
Sulamerica Cia Nacional de Seguros SA v Enesa Engenharia SA [2012] EWCA Civ 638; [2013] 1 W.L.R. 102.
17
Holloway v Chancery Mead Ltd [2007] EWHC 2495 (TCC); 117 Con. L.R. 30.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
