Security for future orders, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406997 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Security for future orders
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Security for future orders
28-57
A somewhat different issue arises with respect to an order that may relate to maintaining the business pending completion of
the arbitration. In ICC Case No.10596 of 2000, 517  a manufacturer (referred to as B) and a distributor (referred to as A) entered
into two agreements for distribution of pharmaceutical products. The distribution agreements were subject to Swiss law and
provided for ICC arbitration in Paris. A distribution permit was required for distribution of the products in China. The distributor
A held the distribution permit. There was a provision in the agreements requiring the distributor to surrender the permit on
termination of the agreements. After the distributor, A, initiated arbitration, the Manufacturer, B, sought an interim award to
the effect that the distribution permit be provided to B pursuant to art.23(1) (the predecessor to art.28(1)) of the ICC Rules. The
Tribunal granted the order and in doing so commented on various aspects of art.23(1) of the 1998 Rules.
28-58
As to the element of “risk of imminent and irreparable harm”, the Tribunal stated as follows:
 
“[17]As stated above, A admits that B needs the documents to be able to commercialise its products, but it
has argued that monetary loss is not irreparable harm, as, assuming that A were to be held liable for such loss,
B would be able to recover it in the form of damages. Although, strictly speaking, this view may be correct,
the arbitral Tribunal considers that it would be unreasonable to refuse the relief sought on those grounds. The
tribunal has already explained that the parties must refrain from any conduct (whether action or inaction)
which may aggravate the dispute, and that arbitrators sitting under the ICC Rules have the power to issue
decisions prohibiting such conduct.
 
[18]Therefore, any non marginal risk of aggravation of the dispute is sufficient to warrant an order for interim
relief. Indeed, it would be foolish for the tribunal to wait for a foreseeable, or at least plausibly foreseeable,
loss to occur, to then provide for its compensation in the form of damages (assuming that B is entitled to
such damages, which is not the issue here), rather than to prevent the loss from occurring in the first place.
Therefore, the fact that B may recover losses in the form of damages is no valid objection and does not
preclude it from seeking provisional relief.”
28-59
As to “urgency” the Tribunal commented as follows:
[19] “A final requirement for interim relief under ICC practice is that the request relates to a matter of urgency, it
being understood that ‘urgency’ is broadly interpreted; the fact that a party’s potential losses are likely to increase
with the mere passing of time and that it would be unreasonable to expect that party to wait for the final award
suffices. The considerations relating to the risk of irreparable harm apply equally to the requirement of urgency. B
has made a plausible case that it is exposed to further economic harm if it does not recover the documents and that
such harm may increase with the passing of time. Because the Tribunal considers that this possible result should
be avoided rather than remedied, the sooner action is taken the better.”
28-60

Security for future orders, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406997 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Based in part on the analysis above, the Tribunal decided that an interim award was appropriate and granted relief in the
following terms:
“On the basis of the foregoing, the arbitral Tribunal: orders A to immediately deliver and/or procure delivery to
B the Registration Certificate for product X issued by the Bureau of Drug Administration and Policy, Ministry
of Public Health, the People’s Republic of China and the Pricing Approval issued by the National Development
Planning Committee, the People’s Republic of China.”
Footnotes
517
ICC Case No.10596, Interlocutory Award, 2000 (2005) YBCA Vol.XXX pp.66–76.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
