Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 1 - Introduction
A Practical Guide to Effective Dispute Resolution: Methods & Clauses 1st Ed.
Mainwork
Introduction
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Introduction to the book and dispute resolution processes
1-001
Despite the best efforts of businesses and legal teams to craft bulletproof contracts, the harsh reality is that disputes do emerge,
often escalating rapidly. This undeniable fact of the commercial landscape means that, without the application of out-of-court
dispute resolution procedures, conflicts inevitably make their way to the courtroom.
The economic importance of effective dispute resolution can be illustrated by reference to the value of the global trade in goods
and services. The total value of global trade has grown from around US$6.45 trillion in 2000 to US$32 trillion in 2022. 1  A study
by the US Chamber of Commerce Institute for Legal Reform (ILL) estimated that in 2011, 2  the direct costs of commercial claims
resolved through litigation were approximately US$870 billion globally. In addition, litigation imposes significant indirect costs,
including wasted management time, deterioration of business relationships, and organisational stress. 3  These additional costs
bring the estimated total global cost of commercial dispute resolution to in excess of US$1 trillion. 4
One of the problems with litigation is that it tends to be procedure-heavy, formal, rigid, complex, time consuming and costly. By
its adversarial nature, litigation often results in the parties’ legal battle in court giving rise to escalation of their dispute. This can
be made worse with the exchange of unfriendly, aggressive, and increasingly strident legal correspondence. This approach can
quickly destroy business relationships between the parties and, ultimately, lead to unsatisfactory results including the “winning”
party losing more than they might receive in a final order.
Moreover, it is an almost inevitable psychological consequence that focusing on legal arguments and legal positions tends
to antagonise the parties and push them apart, rather than bring them closer together. This reaction can be for a number of
reasons, including a corporate threat rigidity response 5  that, from a psychological perspective, has its roots in our evolutionary
past when, faced with danger, it was important to prioritise quick strong action. This polarised response can be compounded
by something called the ego defence 6  and anxiety avoidance mechanisms. The problem is that, as these responses become
mirrored, the prospects for amicable resolution quickly disappear. These issues are discussed in Chapter Eleven.
The procedural stage is supposed to streamline the dispute resolution process but, due to potentially antagonised relationships
between the opposing parties, coupled with rigid and formalistic procedures, the dispute tends to escalate. This can lead to
satellite litigation which may have nothing to do with the merits of the original dispute. In turn, this can lead to escalating the
time and costs spent by parties in litigation.
The most important principle in effective dispute resolution is for the parties to be focused on the outcome they want rather
than the issues that have led to the dispute. To save time and costs on protracted litigation, it is therefore important to begin
by considering other dispute resolution methods and how to resolve the dispute in the most effective way. This is not to say
that litigation can always be substituted by other methods of dispute resolution, but more that other options must properly be
considered and, where possible, attempted.
When considering what used to be called alternative dispute resolution (ADR) methods, it is better to refer to them as effective
dispute resolution methods.
Use of the ADR acronym often refers to any dispute resolution process that is not litigation. The emphasis in this book is that
parties should start by thinking about what the most effective dispute resolution process is and not start with litigation (as the

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
default) and then think “what are the alternatives?”. Where the abbreviation “ADR” is used for convenience in sections of this
book, it should be taken as meaning alternative effective dispute resolution processes and not reinforcing litigation as being
the primary option.
The simple message is that, in developing a dispute resolution strategy, none of these methods should be considered to be
“alternative” and in isolation but should, instead, form part of a dispute resolution toolbox. 7
Purpose of this book
1-002
The purpose of this book is to show how the dispute resolution process and contractual dispute resolution clauses can be made
more effective. In turn, this can give rise to savings in cost and time as well as preserving the business relationship between
the parties.
Whilst the book is primarily based on English law, it is also suitable for lawyers from other jurisdictions or in-house lawyers
working with different jurisdictions. To assist non-UK based lawyers, it also provides an international perspective on dispute
resolution methods and clauses and is more focused on practical aspects of dispute resolution rather than just English law. At the
same time, given that dispute resolution methods are well developed in the English jurisdiction, lawyers based in jurisdictions
with less developed systems of out-of-court dispute resolution, or which are only just developing their arbitration and mediation
laws, may also find this book very beneficial.
Parties and their lawyers can make the dispute resolution process more effective both at the time of the contract drafting, by
thinking about any potential disputes and how they will be affected by a properly drafted dispute resolution clause, and also
when the dispute arises: even if there is no dispute resolution clause, parties can still resolve their dispute by applying chosen
or blended dispute resolution methods in a more effective way.
The book aims to explore what makes a dispute resolution process more efficient under which circumstances well-established
methods of dispute resolution can increase effectiveness, what dispute resolution strategy could be adopted; whether hybrid or
blended dispute resolution methods could bring a better result; and how technology and psychology could help improve the
efficiency of the dispute resolution process.
The book should also help contract drafters navigate through the different dispute resolution methods, to make better choices
when selecting a particular escalation clause, applicable law, jurisdiction, etc. and, ultimately, to draft a more effective clause.
At the same time, it is hoped that this book will be helpful to those who find themselves participating in a dispute resolution
process and need to decide on their dispute resolution strategy. This can include lawyers who are not usually involved in dispute
resolution but may have been confronted with a dispute, before passing it to dispute resolution experts. The book should provide
them with general knowledge about dispute resolution methods and how a dispute can be resolved in a more effective way.
It is hoped that this book will give them the confidence that they will be able to navigate the process and consider options to
resolve the dispute by means other than litigation.
Dispute resolution lawyers may also find this book helpful as a reminder of the dispute resolution options that exist, as well
as how to make this process more productive for their clients by reducing the time and cost to get to the optimum outcome.
Litigation lawyers, in particular, who are more familiar with court terminology, may also find it useful to get to know more
about arbitration and mediation processes.
The book is not aimed at providing an in-depth analysis of each individual method of resolving a dispute or to delve into
extensive analysis of the law on each individual issue related to those methods. It is a practical guide to dispute resolution for
those who are less familiar with the subject matter but come across it in their professional life.
In order to colour in the jigsaw of dispute resolution tools, significant chapters on the use of artificial intelligence (AI) in dispute
resolution and the psychology of dispute resolution are included.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Disputes and their effective resolution
1-003
The subject matter of this book is disputes and their effective resolution. Disputes here are understood to mean any difference,
disagreement or conflict between the parties, which can involve legal or factual issues. The primary focus is on the issues
between the trading business parties and their commercial relationship.
Reference to a dispute resolution process is considered from a more formal perspective as a process whereby the parties attempt
to resolve a dispute by one of the established methods or by their hybrid or blended form. Although it is possible, or even
desirable, that a dispute could be resolved by informal negotiations between the employees or agents of two parties, the focus of
this book is on more formal arrangements, which are either referred to as “non-binding” or “binding” dispute resolution methods.
An “effective” dispute resolution process involves the use of appropriate methods and techniques to address the issues, help the
parties to reach mutually acceptable solutions and prevent further escalation of the dispute (or other differences between them)
in a fair, time efficient, and cost-effective way. Ultimately, effective dispute resolution should help the parties to preserve their
relationship and not just to save costs and time in the short term. If this is done in a focused way, then it is possible that further
benefits will be derived from the dispute resolution process and its outcome.
Drafting dispute resolution clauses and dealing with subsequent disputes
1-004
One of best ways to make dispute resolution more effective in the future is to draft an effective dispute resolution clause at the
start. Although it may be difficult to envisage what future disputes could arise when drafting the contract, it is possible to draft a
dispute resolution clause which makes it less susceptible to a challenge later on. However, there is a downside in drafting a wide
catch-all clause and contract drafters should bear in mind that, if such a clause is ambiguous enough to allow multiple variations
for interpretation, this can lead to further escalation of the dispute based solely on the wording of the clause itself. It is therefore
important that contract drafters do not leave drafting of this clause until the last minute when agreeing the contract, but, instead,
focus their attention on it from the start. If a dispute subsequently arises, this could save a lot of time and money later.
Another important aspect that can make future dispute resolution more effective is to agree at the time of drafting of the contract
the details of how the dispute could be resolved via an escalation clause. The reason for taking care before the contract becomes
operational is because, if a dispute arises later, it may be very difficult to agree on anything. This problem is heightened if the
relationships between the parties have been antagonised by the dispute.
As discussed in the book, it is important to have an escalation mechanism in the dispute resolution clause, combining both
binding and non-binding methods. It is much easier to agree the mechanism of such a clause at the start of a contractual
relationship when their intentions for doing business together are fresh and a collaborative spirit is likely to be at its highest.
This does not mean, however, that without an escalation clause agreed at the time of drafting of the contract, the dispute cannot
still be resolved effectively. Whilst a pre-agreed structure and process in the dispute resolution clause means there is less scope
for arguments or secondary litigation if a dispute arises, parties are still best to try and focus their attention on a collaborative
resolution of the dispute at all times. Although it may depend on the nature of the dispute, it is still possible to agree a very
effective and tailored mechanism for dispute resolution after a dispute becomes apparent, or even when the process of resolving
the dispute has already been started.
Ultimately, the most effective approach will depend on the parties’ intentions, psychology, emotions, and whether their focus
is on a particular short-term goal or the benefit of a continued business relationship. If the goal is to preserve relationships and
resolve the dispute collaboratively, the various methods of dispute resolution, either alone or in combination, can still be applied
to resolve the dispute in the most effective way.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
Chapters overview
1-005
This book consists of three parts. Part 1 is dedicated to the exploration of the main non-binding methods of dispute resolution
(namely negotiation, mediation, and early neutral evaluation) and how to use them in the most effective way. It also deals with
how to draft escalation clauses to facilitate these methods of dispute resolution most effectively.
Part 2 deals with binding methods of dispute resolution: expert determination, arbitration and litigation. It also discusses the
most effective ways to resolve disputes using these methods, as well as providing practical guidance on how to draft arbitration
clauses, jurisdiction clauses and expert determination clauses.
The first two parts of the book may be particularly useful for contract drafters, as well as those who are less familiar with dispute
resolution or the various methods of resolving disputes.
Part 3 describes more innovative ways of dealing with dispute resolution and explores different approaches that can affect
the success or failure of resolution. This part combines a discussion on hybrid and blended dispute resolution methods with a
discussion on how technology, AI and psychology can contribute to making dispute resolution more effective. This discussion
is likely to be useful to all readers, as it should provide innovative ideas on how to improve the dispute resolution process that
even seasoned dispute resolution lawyers may not be familiar with.
In this sense, it is hoped that the book can help all lawyers, and even business clients/parties, to make their dispute resolution
process more effective.
Binding v non-binding dispute resolution methods
1-006
Non-binding dispute resolution methods can take a variety of forms including negotiation, mediation and early neutral
evaluation. These methods are referred to as “non-binding” because, by their nature, they may conclude with the dispute still
unresolved or with a settlement agreement with terms that may not be legally enforceable in certain jurisdictions.
In contrast, binding dispute resolution methods, by definition, must lead to a binding decision being made by a neutral third-
party, be it the court, an arbitral tribunal or an expert. The main binding methods for commercial dispute resolution are litigation,
arbitration and expert determination.
Dispute Review Boards (DRB) can also provide a third-party binding decision, typically in relation to construction,
infrastructure, energy and property development project disputes. DRB decisions cannot be enforced in the same way as a court
judgment or arbitral award and, instead, should be considered as a form of contractual agreement that, if breached, can lead
to a claim or application for enforcement.
On the subject of enforceability of settlements arising from a non-binding method, with the consent of both parties, any
settlement reached via a non-binding route can still be made legally binding by virtue of a contractual settlement agreement
or consent order.
The trend in encouraging parties to consider non-binding methods has been highlighted by the Singapore Convention on
Mediation (the Singapore Convention), 8  which applies to agreements resulting from mediation that have been concluded
in writing to resolve an international commercial dispute. This treaty provides an internationally agreed framework for the
enforcement and invocation of cross-border settlements. The impact of the Singapore Convention and the associated Model
Law 9  is considered in para.1-013.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Why consider non-binding methods?
1-007
Once a dispute has arisen, a primary reason why parties start with a non-binding approach is to try to resolve the dispute whilst
preserving long-term and ongoing business relationships and without resorting to costly and time-consuming court or arbitration
proceedings. As non-binding methods are typically not constrained by court procedures, further advantages to the parties include
increased flexibility and control in addition to the confidentiality of the proceedings and the final outcome.
The biggest practical barrier to reaching settlement through a non-binding method is the characteristic adversarial nature of
dispute resolution where neither party is prepared to make a concession or admit that they may have been at fault. The hard
fact is that pursuing a non-binding route will not bring a successful resolution to a dispute, unless both parties are ultimately
prepared to compromise, make concessions and adjust their position. 10
Where the parties are willing to attempt to reach an amicable settlement, they can agree to do so in the absence of any
contractual obligation. However, contractual clauses referring to non-binding methods are often included in contracts as a way
of encouraging or reminding parties to resolve their disputes amicably prior to initiating and without the need for formal legal
action.
Overview of non-binding and binding methods
1-008
The main non-binding dispute resolution methods are negotiation, mediation and early neutral evaluation (ENE). Negotiation
involves the parties attempting to reach a settlement through direct communication, whilst mediation involves a neutral third-
party facilitating discussions and negotiations between the parties. 11  Conciliation is considered to be a form of evaluative
mediation as it differs from mediation in that the conciliator is more actively involved in proposing and identifying possible
solutions.
Whilst ENE requires an agreed process, it does not directly lead to resolution and, arguably, could be considered to be more
of a tool in the dispute resolution toolbox. As such, it is possible for the parties to agree to ENE prior to or during negotiation
or mediation. ENE uses an agreed independent third-party, who is typically an experienced and knowledgeable professional in
the relevant field, to assess the merits of the case and provide an impartial evaluation of the respective merits, strengths and
weaknesses of both sides. Provided the parties have a trust in the independence and experience of the ENE evaluator, this can
enable the parties to gain a greater insight into the merits of their position and enable them to make better informed decisions
about any settlement negotiations. The non-binding nature of this evaluation is a primary distinction between ENE and expert
determination.
The main binding dispute resolution methods are litigation, arbitration and expert determination. In expert determination, there
is also a neutral party, but their role is to make a decision on a dispute or issue between the parties, which often is of a technical
nature. A neutral party will have expertise in that particular area and will be able to deliver a binding decision on a defined issue.
Arbitration also involves a neutral third party or parties, known as an arbitrator or panel of arbitrators (the arbitral tribunal),
who render a binding decision on the issues in dispute. This decision is called an “award”. The process is typically less formal
and more flexible than litigation with the parties being able to choose, or agree a procedure for the appointment of arbitrators,
as well as the procedural rules that will be followed by the tribunal to resolve the dispute.
Litigation is the most well known dispute resolution method and, in the absence of any other agreement, is effectively the default
method for dispute resolution. It involves the dispute being considered by a judge or judges in courts, who issue a binding
judgment, decision or order on a case. Unlike arbitration, it tends to follow more formal rules of procedure applicable in a
particular jurisdiction and/or for a particular court.
In some jurisdictions, there may be other methods of dispute resolution and some methods may be mandated by law to be
attempted before a case can proceed to court. Alternatively, the parties may pre-agree to refer a dispute or all the disputes to other

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
methods of dispute resolution. If a stepped resolution mechanism is provided in a contract, it is likely that it will be included
in a so-called “escalation clause”.
Contractual escalation clauses
1-009
Contractual escalation clauses are clauses that outline a series of steps to be taken in the event of a dispute. These clauses usually
require the parties to attempt to resolve the dispute through a series of non-binding methods before progressing to more formal
binding methods, such as expert determination, arbitration or litigation. By including these non-binding methods in a contract,
parties can demonstrate a commitment to resolving disputes in a timely and cost-effective manner, whilst also maintaining a
good working relationship with each other.
Properly constructed contractual escalation clauses can be used together to provide a comprehensive framework for effective
dispute resolution with the fall back that, if the non-binding methods do not result in a settlement agreement, this automatically
leads to a binding method that is agreed and defined in advance.
Individually or in sequence, non-binding methods can provide a valuable alternative to court proceedings and can help to reduce
the time, cost and stress associated with resolving disputes, as well as giving both parties an opportunity to keep their settlement
confidential.
Typical problems with dispute resolution clauses
1-010
Many dispute resolution clauses in contracts tend to share a common problem in that they tend to be “midnight clauses”. These
are negotiated or simply drafted in a rush, sometimes cut and pasted, at the close of a transaction. If last-minute drafting occurs,
this can also lead to the parties signing the agreement without having fully considered the pros and cons of the different options
for settling any future disputes.
If the drafters cut and paste a precedent from an existing contract, without any active consideration about the approach they
would really want to take in the event of a material dispute arising, this increases the risks that the precedent wording is not
suitable and may even result in the relevant dispute resolution clause being invalid.
An illustration of a problematic clause would be one where the scope of the resolution clause does not cover the specific dispute
that arises. In addition, an escalation clause typically includes an express and mandatory series of steps that the parties have
agreed they must engage in prior to moving to the final, binding dispute resolution stage of the agreement. If the parties do not
have a clear mutual understanding of what these non-binding stages include, this increases the prospects of delay and cost once
a dispute has arisen. An escalation clause may also create obstacles where one party needs urgent relief unless the clause has
been drafted to make allowances for such circumstances.
The essence of an escalation clause is that a binding phase of the dispute resolution (e.g. litigation or arbitration) can only be
started in accordance with the parties’ express agreement. If a contract contains an escalation clause creating an express pre-
condition that is embedded within a specific arbitration or litigation clause, it is essential that the process that is set out in the
relevant clause is followed before litigation, or before a notice of arbitration is served. In the case of arbitration, if the process
is not followed, then an arbitration clause will not be effective, and a tribunal may determine that it lacks jurisdiction or that the
dispute is not yet admissible for arbitration. In litigation, there are also ways a court may deal with the matter if an escalation
clause is included in the contract, including staying the proceedings until the parties comply with it. 12

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
Dispute resolution trends: moving towards out-of-court dispute resolution
1-011
It is generally accepted that a lot of commercial disputes that go to court or arbitration still end up being resolved through a
consent order/settlement agreement without a final hearing. In order to understand the trends in dispute resolution, it is worth
considering why parties often end up settling out of court despite having already engaged in costly legal battles.
Although more common in personal/consumer disputes, psychological factors can also play a part in whether a dispute ends
up in court. This is because emotions such as anger, a sense of injustice or the principle of the matter can sometimes override
rational cost-benefit analysis. Another psychological factor is that either party may perceive that going to court could strengthen
their negotiating position and, by initiating legal proceedings, this could demonstrate they are serious and willing to incur
significant costs. In turn, for a party with deeper pockets, this could put pressure on the opposing party to be more amenable
during settlement talks. The psychology of dispute resolution is covered in Chapter Eleven.
In more complex cases, it is also possible that, in response to legal proceedings having been started, the respondent then discloses
evidence or information that was not available to a claimant prior to the start of the proceedings. One of the problems in the
non-binding stages of the dispute resolution process is that there is no duty of disclosure. If proceedings start and the parties
have exchanged their pleadings, this can provide a clearer picture of the strengths and weaknesses of each party’s case. In turn,
this can facilitate more informed and, therefore, realistic negotiations.
There are also occasions why one party or the other may be seeking a judgment that could serve as a precedent in a dispute
involving novel legal issues or principles. Given the confidential nature of negotiation and mediation, the scope for setting a
legal precedent is zero.
Having started proceedings, the realities of mounting legal fees and the time and resources required can sometimes lead to a
more pragmatic assessment of the dispute’s financial impact. In addition, as the case progresses, uncertainty about the outcome
can increase. This can actually make both parties more risk-averse and open to a settlement that guarantees some level of gain
or limits potential loss.
A further, sometimes hidden, problem with any protracted legal battle is that it can divert significant resources from a business’s
core operations. If a party reaches this conclusion, they can also decide that reaching a settlement might allow them to refocus
on their business priorities.
Global trends
1-012
These background factors of cost and time, coupled with the prospect of delays in proceedings coming to court are some key
factors driving a noticeable shift in how commercial disputes are resolved with a move away from traditional litigation in
national courts towards other dispute resolution mechanisms such as mediation and arbitration.
The trend has also been stimulated by the growing complexity of international commercial transactions which demand more
flexible and specialised resolution mechanisms.
As will be explored, there are a number of potential benefits of using arbitration in cross-border transactions, where parties often
prefer a neutral forum, rather than the courts of one party’s home jurisdiction. In addition, when coupled with the confidentiality
of proceedings, as well as the ease of enforcing arbitration awards across borders under the New York Convention, 13  it is
commonly assumed that, with the continued growth in global trade, there has been a significant increase in popularity of
arbitration as a dispute resolution mechanism.
However, figures available from the Disputes Register, 14  reporting statistics from the 13 organisations that handle more than
90% of international arbitrations, shows that, despite a COVID-19-related step up in 2020, the total number of disputes settled

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
through arbitration in these institutions remained roughly flat from 2014 to 2022 at around 5,800–5,900 per year and in 2022
were roughly the same as in 2014.
In contrast, the number of commercial disputes going to mediation has seen a significant increase over the same period. Although
there are no reliable global figures, support for this statement can be found with reference to the 2021 Centre for Effective
Dispute Resolution (CEDR) 15  mediation audit, which showed a 70% increase in number of mediations from 2014 to 2021.
CEDR also reports that there were 17,000 civil dispute mediations in 2020 with 247,000 defended civil cases (excluding family,
employment or criminal) going to court. This indicates that, in 2020, around 7% of parties attempted dispute resolution through
mediation which, flipping this round, indicates that there is substantial potential for this number to grow.
Singapore Convention
1-013
In line with the introduction of the Singapore Convention, 16  mediation is growing in popularity in international commercial
disputes. This is driven by its flexibility, cost-effectiveness and party-focused nature compared to more adversarial processes.
The Singapore Convention is expected to further stimulate the growth of mediation by providing a streamlined way to enforce
mediated settlement agreements that resolve cross-border commercial disputes. As per the New York Convention, there are
clearly defined circumstances where courts may refuse enforcement, including incapacity of a party; invalidity of the agreement
under applicable law; serious breach by the mediator; failure to disclose conflicts of interest; and the settlement agreement is
contrary to public policy.
The Convention applies to settlement agreements resulting from mediation that involve parties from at least two different
countries but does not apply to settlements relating to family, inheritance or employment law, nor those reached as part of court
or arbitral proceedings.
As at 4 May 2023, the Singapore Convention had 56 signatories with 11 countries having ratified it. 17  Whilst not yet as
widespread as the New York Convention, the convention is anticipated to boost the effectiveness of mediation by giving the
parties confidence that an agreement arising out of mediation can be easily enforced abroad.
An additional trend in mediation is the shift to remote hearings that was accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Many
mediation organisations also now make available online dispute resolution (ODR) platforms providing tools to assist the
mediation process and allowing parties in different locations to mediate disputes from anywhere. There is also an increase in
specialisation within mediation and an associated rise in mediators with expertise in specific areas such as intellectual property,
technology disputes, cross-cultural conflicts and environmental disputes.
Dispute resolution trends
1-014
More and more jurisdictions are promoting or even mandating mediation before cases can escalate to litigation or arbitration. The
EU Mediation Directive 18  is a prime example, leading to greater mediation utilisation in Europe. This directive has been around
longer than the Singapore Convention but had similar aims, including to facilitate access to non-litigation dispute resolution
methods across borders; promote amicable, out-of-court settlements of disputes; and ensure a balanced relationship between
mediation and judicial proceedings.
The EU Mediation Directive applies to civil and commercial cross-border matters, where at least one party is domiciled in an
EU member state. As per the EU Treaty, member states have some flexibility in how they implement the directive, and this has
led to inconsistencies in specific rules and procedures across the EU. Examples of divergence in the implementation include the
level that mediation is encouraged (mandatory, voluntary) as well as the qualification and training requirements for mediators.
A high-level result has been an increase in the use of mediation in cross-border EU disputes.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
While the EU Mediation Directive no longer directly applies in the UK, the government remains supportive of mediation and
encourages its use. This includes the Civil Procedure Rules (CPR) encouraging courts to actively manage cases, which includes
the option to refer matters to mediation. Judges can also consider penalising parties that unreasonably refuse to consider non-
litigation dispute resolution. Behind this, there is also the HM Courts & Tribunals Service (HMCTS) Mediation Service, which
offers mediation for small claims and some other civil disputes. To illustrate this trend in encouraging mediation, recent case
law has established that, in England and Wales, under certain circumstances, the court can order parties to engage in mediation
before litigation. 19
Although English law is not focused on international commercial dispute resolution, the increase in awareness and local
application of mediation has given rise to the UK having a robust and mature mediation landscape that pre-dates the
EU Mediation Directive. This includes the existence of professional bodies promoting best practice and formal mediator
accreditation. 20
In the United States (US), arbitration is a favoured mechanism for resolving commercial disputes, especially in certain sectors
like technology and finance. Mediation is also highly encouraged and can be mandated by courts as a step before litigation. 21
Canada shows similar trends, with both arbitration and mediation being well-established for commercial dispute resolution.
The Asia-Pacific region has also seen rapid growth in arbitration centres, with Singapore and Hong Kong becoming leading
venues for international arbitration. With the growth of the Singapore International Mediation Centre (SIMC) and the Singapore
Convention, mediation is also gaining ground, supported by cultural norms favouring consensual dispute resolution and recent
legislative efforts to promote mediation.
Arbitration is also becoming popular in Africa, with several countries establishing arbitration centres to attract international
business. Following the global trend, mediation and other forms of dispute resolution are being increasingly utilised, although
the extent varies significantly across different jurisdictions.
The Middle East has been consciously investing in establishing arbitration centres with a number appearing over the last 10
years including in Dubai, Qatar and Bahrain. Mediation is less developed there but is also starting to gain recognition as a viable
method for dispute resolution.
In line with the general trend, arbitration has become more prevalent in South American countries as a means of resolving
commercial disputes, especially in cross-border transactions. Similarly, mediation is also on the rise, with countries adopting
new laws and regulations to facilitate its use in commercial disputes.
Whist there are differences from country to country, the dominant form of mediation used internationally is facilitative
mediation, where the mediator helps parties facilitate communication and negotiation but does not impose a solution.
The continued growth of international mediation is also supported by a number of global organisations, including the
International Mediation Institute (IMI), World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and the ICC International Centre for
ADR.
Mediation trends and approaches can differ across regions and legal systems, so parties involved in international commercial
contracts need to take care in making sure that they understand what they are agreeing to, if they agree to a mediation clause.
In addition, it is worth noting that there is a development of newer trends like the rise of hybrid mediation models (typically
combining mediation with arbitration in a sequence arb-med-arb) to include the benefits of both processes.
The desire to preserve business relationships, reduce costs and achieve more creative, flexible solutions that are not bound by
the strict rules of law applicable in litigation and arbitration, has also encouraged an increasing emphasis on resolving disputes
through negotiation and a settlement agreement by consent, often facilitated by mediation.
Other trends
1-015

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
Arbitration has solidified its position as the default approach for resolving international commercial disputes. This is mainly
due to its procedural flexibility, party autonomy and the relative ease of enforcing arbitral awards internationally under the
New York Convention.
While arbitration remains more common for large commercial disputes, the use of mediation has expanded strategically. This
is particularly so for disputes where maintaining ongoing business relationships is critical. Its capacity for creative solutions
and confidentiality aligns well with certain complex commercial situations.
Many arbitration agreements now contain an escalation clause requiring parties to attempt mediation or negotiation in good
faith before initiating formal arbitration. 22  This trend is not new and reflects the near-universal acknowledgment that binding
proceedings can be costly and time consuming and inevitably damage business relationships but, when issues arise, parties may
still need such a clause to ensure that efforts are properly made to avoid the slippery slope that is litigation. The growth in the use
of escalation clauses, carefully tailored for the specific contract or relationship, also contributes to the trend towards increasing
use of mediation as part of the dispute resolution jigsaw.
There are also regional cultural differences. This is highlighted by contrasting Asia with the US, with the former often
demonstrating more openness to integrating mediation culturally, and the latter leaning more heavily on arbitration, as an
adversarial win-lose model.
A further trend is the use of technology with a significant post-COVID-19 increase in ODR. ODR platforms offer significant
benefits in facilitating dispute resolution across borders, especially for smaller disputes or initial phases of larger ones.
Technology has also delivered benefits in helping with secure document exchange.
AI is rapidly developing with current discussions focused on support roles of AI in managing documentation. The technology
is relatively immature but there is no question that one of the biggest future developments in dispute resolution will be the use
of AI in data analysis and as an aid for decision making. However, the rate of development will depend on user confidence and
addressing ethical concerns. The use of AI is addressed in detail in Chapter Ten of this book.
The last two decades have seen a clear trend towards the increased use of non-litigation dispute resolution mechanisms, with
arbitration and mediation becoming more prevalent in commercial dispute resolution worldwide. The exact percentages of
disputes resolved through each method vary by region and are influenced by local legal cultures, the availability of reliable
dispute resolution institutions, and specific industry practices. Nonetheless, the global movement towards resolving disputes
out of court reflects a broader recognition of its benefits in terms of efficiency, cost, confidentiality and the preservation of
business relationships.
Footnotes
1
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Global Trade Update (March 2023), https://
unctad.org/system/files/official-document/ditcinf2023d1_en.pdf.
2
US Chamber Institute for Legal Reform, International Comparisons of Litigation Costs: Canada, Europe, Japan, and
the United States (June 2013).
3
Wenxue Lu, Lihan Zhang, Jing Pan, “Identification and Analyses of Hidden Transaction Costs in Project Dispute
Resolutions” (2015) 33(3) International Journal of Project Management 711—assessment of hidden transaction costs
in project dispute resolutions using a 13-variable framework of the hidden transaction costs through a literature review
and semi-structured interviews. Five factors were identified: reputation, future co-operation and trust, emotion, time
and execution of judgments.
4
World Economic Forum “It costs trillions of dollars to settle commercial conflicts. It’s time for Alternative Dispute
Resolution” (20 December 2017), www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/12/commercial-disputes-conflicts-costs-trillions-
dollars-alternative-dispute-resolution/.
5
B.M. Staw et al. “Threat Rigidity Effects in Organizational Behavior: A Multilevel Analysis” (1981) 26(4) Administrative
Science Quarterly 501.
6
M. Di Giuseppe and J.C. Perry, “The Hierarchy of Defense Mechanisms: Assessing Defensive Functioning with the
Defense Mechanisms Rating Scales Q-Sort” (2021) 12 Front. Psychol. 718440; S. Freud, “The neuro-psychoses of

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291540 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
defence” in J. Strachey (ed.), The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Early
Psycho-Analytic Publications, Vol.3 (London: The Hogarth Press, 1893–1899).
7
Sir Geoffrey Vos, “Mediation and Dispute Resolution”, Worshipful Company of Arbitrators: Annual Master’s Lecture –
Rathbones Investment Management (March 2022); Sir Geoffrey Vos, “The Relationship between Formal and Informal
Justice” Speech at Hull University (March 2021).
8
United Nation Convention on International Settlement Agreements Resulting from Mediation (the Singapore
Convention) (2018), A/RES/73/198.
9
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Mediation and International Settlement Agreements Resulting
from Mediation (2018) (amending the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Conciliation (2002)).
10
P. Randolph, The Psychology of Conflict: Mediating in a Diverse World (Bloomsbury, 2016).
11
C. Gill et al., Models of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR): A report for the Legal Ombudsman (Edinburgh: Queen
Margaret University, Consumer Insight Centre, 2014), pp.16–18; S. Blake et al., The Jackson ADR Handbook (Oxford:
OUP, 2013).
12
Churchill v Merthyr Tydfil CBC [2023] EWCA Civ 1416; [2024] Costs L.R. 249.
13
The Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York Convention) (1958),
https://www.newyorkconvention.org/.
14
“The 
International 
Arbitration 
Statistics 
Report” 
(2022), 
The 
Business 
Disputes 
Register, 
https://
www.disputesregister.org/advice/international-arbitration-statistics-report. Reports that over 90% of international
arbitration cases are handled by 13 organisations: LMAA, ICDR, ICC, CIETAC, SIAC, LCIA, HKIAC, DIS, DIAC,
SCC, SCAI, VIAC and ICSID.
15
CEDR, The Ninth Mediation Audit (2021), p.6.
16
The Singapore Convention (2018), https://www.singaporeconvention.org/.
17
The Singapore Convention (2018)—Jurisdiction Status (https://www.singaporeconvention.org/jurisdictions).
18
Directive 2008/52 on certain aspects of mediation in civil and commercial matters (The EU Mediation Directive) [2008]
OJ L136/3.
19
Churchill v Merthyr Tydfil CBC [2024] Costs L.R. 249.
20
Civil Mediation Council (CMC), https://www.civilmediation.org/.
21
S. Staszak, “Explanations for the Vanishing Trial in the United States” (2022) 18 Annu. Rev. Law Soc. Sci. 43; Marc
Galanter, “The Vanishing Trial: An Examination of Trials and Related Matters in Federal and State Courts” (2004)
1(3) Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 459.
22
Klaus Peter Berger, “Law and Practice of Escalation Clauses” (2006) 22(1) Arbitration International 1.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
