Section J. - Fees and Expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638627...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section J. - Fees and Expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 4 - Establishment and Organisation of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section J. - Fees and Expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal
(a) Introduction
4. 219
The cost of bringing or defending a claim before an international arbitral tribunal is likely to be considerably higher than that
of bringing or defending the same claim before a national court. This is because, in addition to the usual expenses of litigation,
it is necessary for the parties to pay the fees and expenses of the arbitral tribunal (including international travel) and the cost of
hiring suitable accommodation for physical hearings. In addition, where the arbitration is administered by an arbitral institution,
the fees and expenses of that institution must be paid and these are not insignificant. This contrasts sharply with proceedings
before a national court, in which the court rooms, the attendants, and the judges themselves are provided and paid for by the
state. The parties often make no more than a nominal contribution to the state by way of a registration fee or other levy. 335  The
fact that arbitration before a private arbitral tribunal attracts these additional charges makes it more desirable that arbitrations
should not be conducted with the time-consuming formalities of proceedings in a national court. The aim should be to make
use of the informality and flexibility of the arbitral process, so as to reduce time and costs. Thus, the financial burden on the
parties is alleviated, to some extent.
(b) Who fixes the fees?
4. 220
Where an arbitration is conducted under the auspices of an arbitral institution, it is not necessary for the parties to engage in
any direct negotiations with the tribunal concerning the basis of its fees. These are generally fixed by the institution, sometimes
independently, sometimes after consultation with the sole or presiding arbitrator. The parties have no say in the matter. In an
ad hoc arbitration, however, it is necessary for the parties to make their own arrangements. The arbitrators should do this at an
early stage in the proceedings to avoid misunderstandings later. The usual practice is for counsel for each party to take part in
any discussion with the arbitrators about their fees and expenses, so as to avoid any suggestion of impropriety.
(c) Methods of assessing fees
4. 221
No universally established method exists for assessing the fees payable to an arbitrator. At least three methods are usually used:
 
• the ad valorem method, whereby the fee is calculated as a proportion of the amounts in dispute;
 
• the ‘time spent’ method, which establishes an hourly or daily rate; and
 
• the ‘fixed fee’ method, whereby the sum payable to the arbitrator by way of remuneration is fixed at the outset, without
direct reference either to the amounts in dispute or to the time that the arbitrator spends on the case.

Section J. - Fees and Expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638627...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
(i) Ad valorem method
4. 222
The ad valorem method entails assessing the arbitrators’ fees as a percentage of the total amount in dispute (including any
counterclaim). It has the merit of being easy to use and capable of uniform application. It is necessary to know only (a) the total
amount in dispute, and (b) the percentage figure to be applied. With this information, the parties can work out for themselves
what fees they are likely to have to pay, if they take their dispute to arbitration. The ICC is the most prominent amongst the
institutions that adopt this method. The ICC Rules contain a ‘scale of administrative costs and fees’, which shows how the
administrative charges of the ICC Secretariat are calculated by applying a different percentage to each successive slice of
the sum in dispute. 336  The fees payable to the arbitrators may be calculated on a similar basis, except that the percentages
are different and, for each successive slice of the sum in dispute, minimum and maximum percentages are given, to establish
a ‘range’. 337  In practice, the ICC Court fixes the fees of the arbitrators within the overall range, taking into account the
diligence and efficiency of the arbitrators, the time spent, the rapidity of the proceedings, the complexity of the dispute, and
the timeliness of the submission of the draft award. 338
(ii) ‘Time spent’ method
4. 223
The usual method of assessing fees is to establish a rate at which the arbitrators will be paid for the time spent working on
the case. This rate is intended to cover not only work done at the hearing, but also any work done outside the hearing. It is
usual to establish an hourly or daily rate, or sometimes a combination of both. A lower daily or hourly rate is usually fixed
for travelling time, although an arbitrator who works on a train or a flight, for instance, would be justified in charging for the
hours actually worked, rather than treating the whole journey as time spent travelling.
4. 224
The success of a method of payment based on a time-cost rate depends on the arbitrators keeping an accurate record of the
time that they do actually spend on the case. It also depends on the parties being prepared to trust this record, since (apart
from time spent at meetings with the parties and at the hearing) it is not something that can easily be checked. It may be
that the presiding arbitrator should consider it to be one of his or her functions to monitor the fee invoices submitted by the
co-arbitrators. In an UNCITRAL arbitration, this is inevitable, since Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Rules provides that the
arbitrators’ fees shall be ‘reasonable in amount’ and shall be stated separately as to each arbitrator in the award. In general,
the hourly and/or daily rate payable is likely to vary according to the status of the arbitrator and to the size, importance,
and complexity of the arbitration. It is in this context that the amount in dispute will be taken into account when the time
cost method is used. 339  It is right to mention, however, that most international arbitrators with recognised reputations are
prepared to accept that smaller cases should be undertaken at a rate lower than their ‘normal’ rate.
(iii) ‘Fixed fee’ method
4. 225
There are cases in which arbitrators ask to be paid on a fixed fee basis. These cases are usually cases of major importance,
involving arbitrators of high international standing. Where remuneration is to be paid to the arbitrators on a fixed fee basis,
the sum agreed is intended to cover all of the work done by the arbitrators on the case, including time spent at the hearing,
however long it may last. The problem is that it is difficult to know at the outset how the case will develop, whether or not
it will be settled before it reaches a hearing, and if it is not settled, how long the hearing itself is likely to take. The best that
can be done, in such circumstances, is to make an intelligent assessment of the total number of days likely to be spent by the
arbitrators on the case, assuming that it runs its full course, and then to multiply this total by an appropriate daily rate, so as to
arrive at a figure for the fixed fee. The arbitrators may have done a similar calculation; alternatively, they may have applied
a percentage to the total amount in dispute to calculate the fee to which they consider themselves entitled! It may then be
necessary for a certain amount of bargaining to take place between the arbitrators, on the one hand, and the parties, on the

Section J. - Fees and Expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638627...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
other, in order to arrive at an agreed figure. In general terms, fixed fees are increasingly rare and most prestigious arbitrators
are prepared to work on one of the other two, more reasonable, bases.
(d) Negotiating arbitrators’ fees
4. 226
In an ad hoc arbitration, parties and their legal advisers may find themselves obliged to negotiate with arbitrators concerning
their fees and expenses, if they think that the arbitrators are asking for too much. However, no party wants to risk antagonising
the arbitrators by criticising their fees, since each party will have it clearly in mind that the same arbitrators will be sitting in
judgment on its case.
4. 227
It may seem foolish to bargain over a few hundred dollars a day if, by doing so, a claim worth many millions of dollars may be
put in jeopardy. However, arbitrators of the right calibre should not take offence if it is suggested to them that they are proposing
to charge rather more than the ‘going rate’ for the job, as long as the suggestion is made with proper courtesy. However, if such
a suggestion is necessary, it should be made by all the parties. Often, a reference to the fee rates paid by the leading arbitral
institutions can provide a helpful anchor on which to base any discussion.
(e) Commitment or cancellation fees
4. 228
A complex international arbitration may involve protracted proceedings in several separate stages. Arbitrators are invariably
asked to reserve weeks for hearings in complicated cases. Substantial blocks of time are carved out of the arbitrators’ diaries
and they must refuse other remunerative work during the reserved period. Three factors may lead to this time being lost to the
arbitrator: first, the parties may settle their dispute; second, the parties may terminate the mandate of an arbitrator for some other
reason; and third—and most commonly—a procedural schedule may have been fixed that turns out to have been too ambitious,
with the result that hearings have to be postponed.
4. 229
Courts in England have held that the right to a commitment fee is not an implied term of the contract created when an appointment
is accepted, and that it would be misconduct if an arbitrator were to require a commitment fee as a condition of continuing to
perform his or her services if the appointment had been accepted without such a reservation. 340  Where the arbitrators were
asked to hold available a sixty-day period some two years in the future, it was not improper for the arbitrators to request a
commitment fee, although ‘it did not accord happily with their status to become involved in negotiations about fees’ after their
appointment. 341  Further, it would be inappropriate if an arbitrator were to conclude an agreement for a commitment fee with
one of the parties when the other party had refused to participate in the negotiations. In any event, once the appointment is
accepted, the parties are under no obligation to agree to any commitment or cancellation fees.
4. 230
It is therefore important for the arbitrators to discuss any commitment or cancellation fee with the parties at the time of accepting
the appointment. It is also important to understand that commitment and/or cancellation fees are acceptable in some cultural
environments, but so unusual as to be unacceptable in others. It is common for such fees not to represent the full-time cost of
the days not used, on the assumption that the arbitrator will be able to undertake some remunerative work during that period;
commitment fees ranging between 50 and 75 per cent of blocked time are usual.

Section J. - Fees and Expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638627...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
(f) Expenses of the arbitral tribunal
4. 231
The question of the expenses incurred by the arbitrators will also have to be settled, unless the arbitration is being conducted
under the auspices of an arbitral institution, which will collect money from the parties and reimburse the arbitrators. This is
usually dealt with at the same time as the question of the arbitrators’ fees. The costs of air or train travel are invariably simply
reimbursed on an ‘as incurred’ basis. Two points must be clarified between the arbitral tribunal and the parties: the first concerns
the class of travel, 342  which, in order to avoid embarrassment later, should be established at the beginning; the second is whether
the arbitrators may claim immediate reimbursement of their travel expenses, rather than wait for the end of the case, or for the
next-stage payment date for fees. There is no justification for asking the arbitrators to fund the cash flow for the arbitral process
and prompt reimbursement of expenses is reasonable.
4. 232
On the question of subsistence expenses whilst attending hearings, there are two methods of dealing with arbitrators’ subsistence
expenses: the first may be described as the ‘reimbursement method’; the second, as the ‘per diem method’.
(i) Reimbursement method
4. 233
If the reimbursement method is adopted, the arbitrators must keep a detailed note of their expenditure, including air fares,
hotel expenses, and so on. Then, from time to time, they will arrange to have these expenses reimbursed, by submitting details
to the relevant arbitral institution, to a designated member of the arbitral tribunal, to the administrative secretary, or to the
parties directly. Sometimes, a limit may be imposed on the amount for which an arbitrator is reimbursed (for example in
respect of hotel expenses), and any expenditure over this limit is then for the account of the arbitrator personally.
(ii) Per diem method
4. 234
The alternative method is for the parties to pay an amount fixed at a daily rate. This daily, or per diem, rate is fixed at a level
sufficient to cover the costs of living away from home at a hotel of good standard in the city where the hearing takes place.
It will also cover incidental expenses such as meals, taxis, printing, and so on. It is paid to the arbitrator as a fixed amount of
money, calculated on a per diem basis by reference to the number of days spent on the case. It is then for the arbitrator to meet
the actual expenses out of this fixed allowance and to pay any excess personally. The ICC, for instance, operates a per diem
rate for reimbursement of subsistence expenses. 343  Of the two methods discussed, this method is preferable as it avoids the
detailed clerical work of checking payments against receipts; it also avoids prying into an arbitrator’s style of living, so as to
decide whether a particular expense was or was not necessary in the interests of the proper conduct of the arbitration.
(iii) ICSID system
4. 235
Although these methods are the most common in practice for the payment of arbitrators’ expenses, variations on these basic
themes may be found. For instance, ICSID offers arbitrators some choice in the method of claiming their expenses. An
arbitrator in an ICSID arbitration is entitled to the following allowances for attending meetings or hearings in connection
with the case:
 
• the actual cost of travel at ‘one class above coach’, by air, or other means of transport (‘coach’ being economy class);
 
• an ‘in–out’ allowance of a fixed sum, to cover the costs of porterage, taxis, tips, and other expenses of travelling;

Section J. - Fees and Expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638627...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
 
• the actual cost of transport within the city where the hearing takes place; and
 
• a per diem allowance, either at the full rate or at the so-called mixed rate. 344
4. 236
The last item on this list merits particular comment. Under the ICSID system, the full per diem rate varies from place to
place, with different rates being established for different cities, according to whether or not they are ‘high-cost cities’. As
an alternative to claiming the full per diem rate, arbitrators may claim reimbursement under the ‘mixed rate’. On this basis,
reimbursement may be claimed for the actual cost of a hotel room (plus tax and service charge), together with an allowance
of one half of the applicable full per diem rate to cover meals, tips, and other expenses. In practice, arbitrators taking part in
an ICSID arbitration tend to choose reimbursement on the mixed rate basis unless otherwise agreed, since this comes nearest
to covering the expenses likely to be incurred in staying, for instance, at a hotel in Washington, DC, where arbitrations under
the ICSID Rules usually take place.
(g) Securing payment of the fees and expenses of the arbitral tribunal
4. 237
The question of establishing effective arrangements regarding fees and expenses is as important for the arbitrators as it is for the
parties. The fact that arbitrators may become functus officio instantly at the joint will of the parties emphasises the importance
for the arbitrators of obtaining adequate security for payment of their fees and expenses. The acceptance by the arbitrators of
the functions bestowed upon them creates a legal relationship between the parties and the members of the arbitral tribunal. This
relationship carries with it an implied undertaking by the parties to compensate the members of the arbitral tribunal fairly in
respect of their work and expenses, whether or not an award is issued. However, even under those national systems of law in
which this is clear, 345  arbitrators do not usually wish to go to the trouble and cost of suing the parties for their fees and expenses.
4. 238
Where the arbitration is being administered by an established arbitral institution, the arbitral tribunal need not concern itself with
the collection of payments on account of its fees and expenses. This is handled by the arbitral institution, usually by requesting
an advance on costs for the entire proceedings or for every phase of them. In any other case, however, the tribunal should arrange
for the parties to make sufficient advance deposits in respect of its fees and expenses. 346  There are two reasons for this: first, it
helps the parties to keep a check on expenses as the case proceeds; and second, it is easier to collect payments from the parties
whilst the arbitration is in progress than when the proceedings are over. In ICSID administered proceedings, when one of the
parties fails to make the advance payments, the proceedings may be stayed and even discontinued unless the non-defaulting
party pays the other party’s share in order to continue with the proceedings. 347
4. 239
Where there is no arbitral institution involved to take care of fees and expenses, a bank account should be established for
receipt of the deposits made by the parties. This account may then also be used for paying fees and expenses to the members
of the arbitral tribunal as and when payments fall due. Any interest earned on the account should be credited to the account
(and, accordingly, be accrued for the benefit of the parties). The account is usually opened in the name of the arbitral tribunal,
with the sole arbitrator or the presiding arbitrator as signatory on the account. If an administrative secretary or administrative
authority has been appointed, the maintenance and operation of the account will usually fall under their responsibilities. As
noted, however, some institutions offer this fundholding service irrespective of whether the arbitration is taking place under
their rules. 348  This is to be recommended in large cases, since the arbitral institutions are far better equipped to undertake this
kind of service than arbitrators and usually do so based on an hourly cost basis far lower than that of the arbitrator. 349
Footnotes

Section J. - Fees and Expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638627...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
335
Although, in some countries, the court fees are calculated on an ad valorem basis and may become substantial when
large sums of money are in dispute.
336
ICC Rules, Appendix III, Art. 3.
337
Where the case is submitted to more than one arbitrator, the ICC Court has discretion to increase the fee up to a maximum
of three times the fee payable to a single arbitrator.
338
ICC Rules, Appendix III, Art. 2.2.
339
The LCIA’s schedule of costs provided, as of 1 October 2020, that hourly rates of tribunal’s fees shall not exceed £500
per hour, covering both hearings and preparatory work. The ICSID fee scale provides for US$3,000 per day or per eight-
hour period of work. The ICDR simply asks individual arbitrators to propose rates in the biographical notes kept by
the institution, on the basis that market forces will provide adequate checks and balances. The ICC operates a scale fee
system, in which time spent is only one of several factors taken into account when fees are fixed by its Court. Most of
the other major arbitral institutions operate a scale based on the amount in dispute.
340
K/S Norjarl A/S v Hyundai Heavy Industries Co. Ltd [1991] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 260; appeal dismissed, [1992] QB 863,
[1991] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 524.
341
Ibid., at [268].
342
The ICC states that the reimbursement of travel expenses is subject to an airfare equivalent to the applicable standard
business-class airfare for air travel and the applicable first-class train fare for rail travel. See ICC, ‘Note to Parties and
Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of Arbitration’, para. 237. ICSID authorises arbitrators to travel at one class above
economy.
343
The standard ICC per diem allowance at time of writing (March 2021) remains US$1,200 for an overnight stay and
$400 for a day’s expenses if no overnight stay in hotel accommodation is involved.
344
The standard ICSID per diem allowance for subsistence expenses (that is, meals, taxis, etc.) still in effect in 2021 is
US$115; however, special per diem allowances of $135, $170, or $185 apply for certain high-cost cities (e.g. $170 for
Washington, DC, which is in the second highest cost category).
345
See, e.g., English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 28.
346
The UNCITRAL Rules make provision for this in Art. 43.
347
ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations, reg. 14.
348
The LCIA provides a fundholding service for arbitrations conducted under the UNCITRAL Rules and also for ad hoc
arbitrations. Where acting as fundholder, the LCIA sets up a dedicated bank account in either dollars, sterling, or euro,
into which advances on costs and other administrative costs should be lodged by the parties. The LCIA will then monitor
the account to ensure that it has enough funds to cover the arbitration costs and will make disbursement as determined
by the tribunal.
349
In 2021, the costs of the LCIA fundholding service were £150 per hour.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
