Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638674 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section A. - Background
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 11 - Recognition and Enforcement of Arbitral Awards
Section A. - Background
(a) Introduction
11. 01
The successful party in an international arbitration expects the award to be performed without delay. This is a reasonable
expectation. Unlike mediation and most other methods of alternative dispute resolution (ADR), the purpose of international
arbitration is to arrive at a binding decision on the dispute. Once this decision has been made, in the form of a written award, it
is an intrinsic element of every arbitration agreement that the parties will carry it out. 1  To put this beyond doubt, it is expressly
set out in many of the leading international rules of arbitration. The UNCITRAL Rules provide that the award ‘shall be final
and binding on the parties’, and that ‘the parties shall carry out all awards without delay’. 2  The ICC Rules provide that ‘the
parties undertake to carry out any award without delay’. 3  The LCIA Rules similarly provide that ‘every award (including
reasons for such award) shall be final and binding on the parties. The parties undertake to carry out any award immediately
and without any delay.’ 4
11. 02
Such statistics as are available suggest that most arbitral awards in most parts of the world are in fact carried out voluntarily
—that is, without the need for enforcement proceedings in national courts. 5  However, in recent years, there is an increasing
number of press reports about attempts to attack arbitral awards, or to resist their enforcement. 6  Up-to-date, comprehensive, and
reliable statistics about arbitration are not readily available to confirm the state of voluntary compliance with arbitral awards, for
two main reasons: first, success stories that do not result in further legal enforcement battles usually do not make the arbitration
news; and secondly there is no particular reason why an arbitral tribunal, or indeed an arbitral institution, should ever know
whether or not an award has been carried out. Unlike a national court, an arbitral tribunal has no role to play in the enforcement
of its decision. When an arbitral tribunal has made a final award, its work is usually done and the tribunal is functus officio.
As for arbitral institutions, while some of them routinely ask the parties to complete post-proceeding questionnaires that may
touch on whether awards have been performed or challenged, few parties go to the trouble of doing so. The most, therefore,
that can be said confidently about the rate of voluntary enforcement is that there appear to be relatively few arbitrations that
are followed by known enforcement proceedings.
11. 03
Although voluntary enforcement therefore appears to be more common than not, it cannot always be relied on. Arbitrations will
usually result in a ‘winner’ and a ‘loser’, and at least one party to an arbitration is likely to be dissatisfied with the result. In
those circumstances, in addition to seeking the annulment of the award (usually in the place of arbitration), the losing party may
also resist any attempt by the winning party to obtain recognition or enforcement of the award, in whatever jurisdiction this is
sought. The purpose of this chapter is to examine the process by which awards may or may not be recognised and enforced.
However, it is appropriate to start by discussing the carrying out, or performance, of awards from a wider perspective, so as to
place recognition and enforcement in their proper contexts.
(b) Performance of awards
11. 04

Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638674 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
As already stated, the majority of awards appear to be performed voluntarily. However, if the losing party fails to carry out an
award, the winning party needs to take steps to enforce performance of it. Effectively, only two steps may be taken. The first is
to exert some form of pressure, commercial or otherwise, in order to show the losing party that it is in its interests to perform
the award voluntarily. The second is to invoke the powers of the state, exercised through its national courts, in order to obtain
a hold on the losing party’s assets, or in some other way to compel performance of the award. 7
(i) Commercial and other pressures
11. 05
A successful party may be in a position to exert commercial pressure on a party who fails or refuses to perform an award.
For example, if a continuing trade relationship exists between the parties, it may well be in the interests of the loser to
perform the award, since failure to do so might entail the loss of further profitable business. If a government or state agency
is concerned, other pressures may be brought to bear by the diplomatic services of the successful party. It may be pointed
out, for instance, that further development loans depend upon the carrying out of existing awards, or that foreign companies
may be discouraged from making further investments if outstanding obligations are not honoured.
11. 06
Pressure may also be exerted by the threat of adverse publicity. This method is sometimes adopted by trade associations and
has the effect of discouraging other traders in the market from dealing with the defaulting party. The Arbitration Rules of the
Grain and Feed Trade Association (GAFTA), for example, contain the following provision:
24. Defaulters
24.1 In the event of any party to an arbitration or an appeal held under these Rules neglecting or
refusing to carry out or abide by a final award of the tribunal or board of appeal made under these
Rules, the Council of GAFTA may post on the GAFTA Notice Board, Web-site, and/or circulate
amongst Members in any way thought fit notification to that effect. The parties to any such arbitration
or appeal shall be deemed to have consented to the Council taking such action as aforesaid. 8
Before ‘posting’, GAFTA communicates with the defaulter and asks whether there is anything to be said, for example whether
there is an outstanding balance due to him or her from the successful party. However, where GAFTA is satisfied that there
is a default, its members are informed. This will naturally make them reluctant to deal with the defaulter unless and until
the award has been carried out.
11. 07
Similarly, but less explicitly, debtor states that end up as losing parties in arbitrations under the rules of the International
Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) may feel (rightly or wrongly) that refusal to perform an award
voluntarily may adversely affect their creditworthiness at the World Bank. It may therefore be no coincidence that, to date, the
overwhelming majority of ICSID awards have been voluntarily performed. 9  In addition, the successful party may be able to
‘monetise’ the award without enforcement proceedings, for example, by selling it (potentially at a discount) to a third-party
investor, who would then seek to enforce or negotiate with the losing party for payment (or partial payment) of the award. 10
(ii) Arbitrator’s duty to render an enforceable award
11. 08
Many modern rules of arbitration contain an express provision that the arbitrator shall ‘make every effort’ to ensure that the
award is enforceable. 11  This is an obligation to use best endeavours, rather than an obligation to secure a result. It is difficult

Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638674 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
to see how it could be otherwise. Even the most conscientious of arbitrators cannot guarantee that the tribunal’s award will
be enforceable in whatever country enforcement may be sought. The most that can be expected is that the tribunal will do its
best to ensure that the appropriate procedure is followed and, above all, that each party is given a fair hearing.
(iii) Enforcement by court proceedings
11. 09
The ultimate sanction for non-performance of an award is enforcement by proceedings in a national court. This is something
that should be borne in mind from the outset of an arbitration. Sometimes, one of the parties (usually the claimant) urges the
arbitral tribunal to run through the proceedings as quickly as possible, so as to obtain a speedy decision. This is understandable
—but it is in the interests of the party that stands to gain most from the arbitration (whether by way of claim or counterclaim) to
ensure that the proper procedures are followed, in case it should become necessary to apply to a national court for enforcement
of the award.
11. 10
Enforcement of a monetary award usually takes place against assets. This means that as a first step, it is necessary to trace the
assets of the losing party (money in a bank account, an aircraft, or a ship, a cargo of oil in transit, or whatever it may be) before
applying to the relevant national court for an order against those assets, or, less constructively, for an order that the trade or
business of the losing party should be liquidated, if payment of the award continues to be refused. 12  In some jurisdictions, it
is possible to enforce against assets held by third parties that are owed to the award debtor. For example, in an enforcement
case before the English courts, the successful party in an arbitration sought enforcement against a ‘letter of credit’ issued by
a bank in favour of the losing party in the arbitration. The UK Supreme Court ordered that the funds due under the letter of
credit be directed to the award creditor (by way of appointment of a receiver) for satisfaction of the arbitral award. 13
11. 11
There are four ways in which a national legal system might provide for the enforcement of arbitral awards. The first arises
when the award is deposited, or registered, with a court or other authority, 14  following which it may be enforced as if it
is a judgment of that court. The second arises when the laws of the country of enforcement provide that, with the leave
of the court, the award of an arbitral tribunal may be enforced directly without any need for deposit or registration. 15  The
third arises when it is necessary to apply to the court for some form of recognition, or exequatur, as a preliminary step to
enforcement. 16  The fourth is to sue on the award as evidence of a debt, on the basis that the arbitration agreement constitutes
a contractual obligation to perform the award. This last method is cumbersome and frequently leaves it open to the losing
party to reopen, by way of defence, the issues already determined by the arbitral tribunal. It is therefore to be avoided, unless
no other method is available.
11. 12
The procedures to be followed in any given case vary from country to country and from court to court. It is not possible to
lay down detailed procedural guidelines here nor would it be particularly helpful to do so, since if action has to be taken
to enforce an award in a particular jurisdiction, it is necessary to obtain competent advice from experienced lawyers who
practise in that jurisdiction.
11. 13
In 2019, in response to the increasing number of arbitrations (and particularly investor–state arbitrations) in which an award
was either challenged or simply not carried out, a practical survey to challenging and enforcing international arbitral awards
was published. 17
11. 14
The survey is in two parts. The first part contains a series of articles by lawyers in law firms around the world on the issues
that are likely to be involved in seeking recognition or enforcement of international arbitral awards. The second part, which
is likely to be of particular interest to lawyers faced with challenging or enforcing such awards, addresses a series of practical
questions to practising lawyers in twenty-nine different states, including Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Canada, England,
France, the Czech Republic, Japan, Russia, Singapore, Switzerland, Russia, and elsewhere. 18  These lawyers respond to the

Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638674 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
questions with practical guidance on, for example, any special local requirements as to the documentation to be filed in
support of a request for challenge or enforcement, the local procedural rules that need to be followed, the fees payable, any
applicable time limits, the possibilities that exist for making searches as to the existence of assets against which enforcement
may be levied, and so forth. Even where recognition or enforcement of an award is sought in a country that is not covered
by the survey, it gives a useful indication of the type of questions that will need to be raised with local lawyers when seeking
recognition or enforcement of a foreign arbitral award in their jurisdiction.
11. 15
As already stated, we do not propose to lay down any such procedural guidelines. What follows, therefore, is a review of
the general principles underlying recognition and enforcement, including the choice of the appropriate forum (and ‘forum
shopping’); the role of the international conventions (in particular the New York and ICSID Conventions) in assisting
recognition and enforcement; and the defences that may be raised, including that of state immunity.
(c) General principles governing recognition and enforcement
11. 16
The challenge of an arbitral award, discussed in Chapter 10, is concerned with attacking an award at its source, in the hope of
having it modified or set aside in whole or in part. Recognition and enforcement, by contrast, are concerned with giving effect
to the award, either in the state in which it was made or in some other state(s).
11. 17
A distinction may be drawn at the outset between (a) the enforcement of an award in the state that is the ‘seat’ of the arbitration,
and (b) the enforcement of an award that is regarded as a ‘foreign’, or ‘international’, award because it was made outside the
territory of the state in which recognition or enforcement is sought. Enforcement of an award in the country that is the seat of
the arbitration is usually a relatively easy process. It generally involves the same processes as are required for the enforcement
of an award in a domestic arbitration. 19  Enforcement of an award that is regarded by the place of enforcement as a ‘foreign’,
or ‘international’, award is a more complex matter. This chapter is mainly concerned with the recognition and enforcement of
such ‘foreign’ awards. 20
(d) Difference between recognition and enforcement
11. 18
It is necessary to distinguish recognition from enforcement. The terms are sometimes used as though they are inextricably
linked. For example, the New York Convention itself speaks of ‘recognition and enforcement’ of foreign arbitral awards. 21
The terms are, however, distinct. On this point, the 1927 Geneva Convention was more precise when it spoke of ‘recognition
or enforcement’. 22  An award may be recognised without being enforced. 23  However, if it is enforced, then it is necessarily
recognised by the court that orders its enforcement. The precise distinction, in other words, is between ‘recognition’ and
‘recognition and enforcement’.
(i) Recognition
11. 19
Recognition on its own is generally a defensive process. 24  It will usually arise when a court is asked to grant a remedy in
respect of a dispute that has been the subject of previous arbitral proceedings. The party in whose favour the award was made
will object that the dispute has already been determined. To prove this, it will seek to produce the award to the court, and
will ask the court to recognise it as valid and binding upon the parties in respect of the issues with which it dealt. The award
may have disposed of all of the issues raised in the new court proceedings and so put an end to those new proceedings as res

Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638674 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
judicata—that is, as recognising that the matters in issue between the parties have already been decided. If the award does
not dispose of all of the claims or issues raised in the new proceedings, but only some of them, it will need to be recognised
for the purposes of ‘claim’ (or in some jurisdictions, ‘issue’ estoppel), so as to prevent those claims (or issues) with which
it does deal from being raised again.
11. 20
The use of recognition on its own may be illustrated by considering the example of a company that is made a defendant in
court proceedings by a foreign supplier for goods sold and delivered, but allegedly not paid for. Suppose that the dispute
between the company and the foreign supplier has already been submitted to arbitration, and that an award has been made,
in which the foreign supplier’s claim was dismissed. In these circumstances, the company will ask the court to recognise
the award as a valid defence to the foreign supplier’s new claim. If the court is prepared to do this, the claim is dismissed.
The legal force and effect of the foreign award will have been recognised, but the award itself will not have been enforced.
In other circumstances, it may be useful to seek recognition of an award, for example to aid enforcement attempts in other
jurisdictions, or because converting an award into a court judgment by recognition may have persuasive value in attempts
at post-award settlement.
(ii) Enforcement
11. 21
By contrast, where a court is asked to enforce an award, it is asked not merely to recognise the legal force and effect of the
award, but also to ensure that it is carried out, by using such legal sanctions as are available. Enforcement goes a step further
than recognition. A court that is prepared to grant enforcement of an award will do so because it recognises the award as
validly made and binding upon the parties to it, and therefore suitable for enforcement. In this context, the terms ‘recognition’
and ‘enforcement’ do run together: one is a necessary part of the other.
(iii) A shield and a sword
11. 22
The purpose of recognition on its own is generally to act as a shield. Recognition is used to block any attempt to raise in
fresh proceedings issues that have already been decided in the arbitration that gave rise to the award of which recognition
is sought. 25  By contrast, the purpose of enforcement is to act as a sword. Enforcement of an award means applying legal
sanctions to compel the party against whom the award was made to carry it out. Such legal sanctions may take many forms.
When the defaulting party is an individual, sanctions may include seizure of property and other assets, forfeiture of bank
accounts, and even, in extreme cases, imprisonment. Where the defaulting party is a body corporate, enforcement is usually
directed primarily against the property and other assets of the corporation, such as its stock-in-trade, bank accounts, trading
accounts, and so forth. In certain situations, however, the directors of the company may be held personally liable (for instance
on a guarantee). In such cases, the sanctions may be directed against them personally.
(e) Place of recognition and enforcement
11. 23
A party who simply seeks recognition of an award will generally do so because it needs to rely on the award by way of defence, or
set-off, or in some other fashion, in court proceedings to which it is the defendant. For this purpose, the party seeking recognition
asks the court concerned to recognise the award as binding on the parties between whom it was made; and the court concerned
is not one that is chosen by the party seeking recognition. It must be a court of the place where the proceedings against that
party are brought. This fact of itself emphasises how important it is that international arbitral awards should be accepted by
courts across the world as truly ‘international’ in their validity and effect.
11. 24

Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638674 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
Where the successful party in an arbitration is seeking to enforce an award, the position is different. The first step is to determine
in which country, or countries, enforcement is to be sought. To reach this decision, it is necessary to locate the state or states
in which the losing party has, or is likely to have, assets available to satisfy the award. This usually calls for careful (and
possibly difficult) investigative work. If enquiries suggest that assets are likely to be available in only one state, the party seeking
enforcement of the award has no choice: for better or worse, he or she must seek enforcement in that state. Where there is a
choice, the party seeking enforcement is able to proceed in one or more places as seems appropriate.
11. 25
Another factor to be taken into account in selecting a forum for the enforcement of an award is whether, under the New York
Convention or some other relevant international convention, the prospective forum recognises and enforces awards rendered at
the place of arbitration. A further factor is the attitude of the local courts to requests for recognition and enforcement of foreign
awards, and notably whether their outlook is likely to be internationalist or parochial. The attitude that the prospective forum
adopts on the question of state immunity 26  is yet another relevant factor if enforcement is being sought against a state or a
governmental agency. 27
(i) Forum shopping
11. 26
The need to locate the place(s) in which a defaulting party has assets is not confined to international arbitration. In domestic
court proceedings, it may also be necessary to locate the defaulting party’s assets in order to enforce a court’s judgment or
an arbitral tribunal’s award. However, in a domestic dispute, the assets of the losing party are usually situated within the
country in which the proceedings take place, since this is normally the country of that party’s residence or place of business.
In international arbitration, the contrary is likely to be the case. The place of arbitration 28  will usually have been chosen, by
or on behalf of the parties, precisely because (inter alia) it is a place with which they have no connection. In other words, the
place of arbitration has been chosen as a neutral forum. It would be purely fortuitous if the parties happened to have assets
situated within this neutral country. When an award has to be enforced, it must generally be enforced in a country other than
that in which it was made. As will be further explained later in this chapter, 29  this is why it is important that international
awards should be recognised and enforced internationally, and not merely in the country in which they are made.
11. 27
If, as often happens in international commerce, assets are located in different parts of the world, the party seeking enforcement
of the award has a choice of country in which to proceed—a chance to go ‘forum shopping’, as it is sometimes expressed. 30
In looking for the appropriate forum, not merely the location of assets but also the other factors mentioned (such as the attitude
of the local courts, the adherence of the target country to the New York Convention, and so on), must be taken into account.
(f) Methods of recognition and enforcement
11. 28
Internationally, it is generally much easier to obtain recognition and enforcement of an international award than of a foreign
court judgment. This is because the network of international and regional treaties providing for the recognition and enforcement
of international awards is more widespread and better developed than corresponding provisions for the recognition and
enforcement of foreign judgments.
11. 29
For example, within the European Union (EU), Council Regulation (EC) No. 44/2001 of 22 December 2000 on Jurisdiction
and the Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters provides only for the enforcement of
European national court judgments solely within Europe. 31  In the global arena, the Hague Conference on Private International
Law has been struggling to agree the text of a convention dealing with the recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments in
civil and commercial matters. In 2005, the delegates only agreed on the mutual recognition and enforcement of judgments that
were rendered pursuant to exclusive choice of court agreements: the Hague Convention on Choice of Court Agreements of 30

Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638674 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
June 2005. Even so, at the time of writing, seventeen years after the 2005 Hague Convention was concluded, it has been ratified
only in the EU, Mexico, Montenegro, and Singapore. The text of the Hague Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement
of Foreign Judgments in Civil or Commercial Matters of 2 July 2019 (which is aimed at providing mutual recognition and
enforcement of foreign judgments on broader civil and commercial matters) has been agreed, but at the time of writing that
Convention has not been ratified by any country. It was only signed by Uruguay and Ukraine and it is therefore unlikely to
change the enforcement landscape in the near future. These conventions contrast dramatically with the ubiquity of the New
York Convention. Indeed, as we have said previously, the widespread recognition and enforceability of arbitral awards is one
of the principal advantages of arbitration as a method of resolving international commercial disputes. 32
11. 30
The method of recognition and enforcement to be adopted in any particular case depends on the place where the award was
made (that is, whether it qualifies, for example, as a New York Convention award). It also depends on the relevant provisions of
the law at the place of intended enforcement (the ‘forum state’). On this aspect, it is usually essential (as previously indicated)
to obtain advice from experienced lawyers in the forum state. 33
11. 31
Local formalities are bound to be involved, whether or not one of the international conventions is applicable. For example, the
original or certified copies of the arbitration agreement and award are usually required. The language of the award may well be
different from the language of the court of the forum state, so that a translation is required—and it may be necessary for this to
be undertaken with considerable formality (for example by consular attestation in the country of origin).
(g) Time limits
11. 32
Time limits for the commencement of proceedings for the recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award are usually laid
down in national legislation. Careful attention must be paid to such time limits (and to any other time limits contained in the
rules of court of the forum state). In this respect, it would be foolhardy not to consult an experienced local practitioner—and
this applies as much to the party seeking recognition or enforcement of an award as it does to the party wishing to challenge an
award. In the United States, for instance, time limits vary from state to state and, when it comes to recognition or enforcement
of an award, the relevant period may be anything from one year to three years. 34
(h) Consequences of refusal of recognition or enforcement
11. 33
The immediate consequence of a refusal to enforce an award is that the winning party fails to get what it wants—namely, payment
of what it is owed by seizure of the loser’s assets in the place in which enforcement was sought. Although this is a disheartening
result for the party seeking enforcement, it should be borne in mind that it will still have an award that may be enforced in
another state in which the losing party has assets. Much depends upon the reason for which enforcement was refused. If, for
example, enforcement was refused for local public policy considerations, it may be possible to find another country in which
the same considerations do not apply. However, if enforcement was refused (for example) because of a fundamental failure
by the arbitral tribunal to give the losing party an opportunity to present its case, it may not be possible to enforce the award
elsewhere, since other courts may refuse enforcement for the same reason. 35  In such an event, the party seeking enforcement
may have no option but to recommence arbitral proceedings, assuming that the right to do so has not been lost by lapse of time.
(i) Role of the international conventions
11. 34

Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638674 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
The dependence of the international arbitral process upon national systems of law is most clearly seen in the context of the
recognition and enforcement of international awards. An arbitral tribunal is limited in the powers that it can exercise—and
these powers, although usually adequate for resolving a particular dispute, fall short of the coercive powers possessed by
national courts. Indeed, a state is generally reluctant to confer on a private arbitral tribunal the sanctioning powers that it
confers on the judges in its own courts. The power to enforce an award against a reluctant party by such summary methods
as the attachment of bank accounts or the sequestration of assets is a power that forms part of the prerogative of the state. In
consequence, the enforcement of awards must take place via the national court at the place of enforcement, operating under
its own procedural rules. The detailed procedures adopted in these courts will vary from country to country. However, the
effect of the international conventions, culminating in the New York Convention, has been to secure a considerable degree
of uniformity in the recognition and enforcement of awards in most of the important trading countries of the world.
11. 35
The main international treaties that apply to the recognition and enforcement of international awards are reviewed in the next
section. In particular, this chapter includes a discussion of the New York Convention, the ICSID Convention, and a number
of regional conventions.
11. 36
The New York Convention has the widest scope of application. Subject to two reservations that may restrict its application, the
New York Convention facilitates the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards in the territories of any of its more
than 167 signatory states, irrespective of the arbitration rules under which the proceedings were conducted. 36  Enshrining as
it does a strong pro-enforcement policy, the New York Convention provides for the recognition and enforcement of foreign
arbitral awards by national courts, subject to a handful of procedural and substantive grounds for objecting to enforcement
that are intended to be limited in scope.
11. 37
Similarly, the ICSID Convention (formally described as the ‘Washington Convention’) provides for the enforcement of those
arbitral awards that were rendered in proceedings involving a national of one contracting state and another contracting state.
Awards falling under the scope of the ICSID Convention are directly enforceable within the territories of all states parties to
ICSID. 37  Like the New York Convention, the ICSID Convention has the vast number of 155 contracting states.
11. 38
In this chapter, we also briefly discuss a number of regional conventions. The application of these regional conventions is
far more limited than the application of the New York and ICSID Conventions, not least because the New York Convention
will apply to almost all disputes, thus superseding those regional conventions.
Footnotes
1
For classic statements of this fundamental element of the agreement to arbitrate see, e.g., Mustill and Boyd, Commercial
Arbitration (2nd edn, Butterworths, 1989), p. 47; see Esso/BHP v Plowman (1995) 11 Arb Intl 282, 283.
2
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 34.2. The final and binding nature of the award is further underlined by the optional waiver
language contained in the Annex to the UNCITRAL Rules, which states: ‘The parties hereby waive their right to any
form of recourse against an award to any court or other competent authority, insofar as such waiver can validly be made
under the applicable law.’
3
ICC Rules, Art. 35.6.
4
LCIA Rules, Art. 26.8.
5
See Queen Mary University of London, School of International Arbitration, and White & Case LLP, 2018 International
Arbitration Survey: The Evolution of International Arbitration, available online at http://www.arbitration.qmul.ac.uk/
media/arbitration/docs/2018-International-Arbitration-Survey-report.pdf, p. 7, which found that 64 per cent of
arbitration users consider that ‘enforceability of awards’ is the most valuable characteristic of arbitration. See also
Queen Mary University of London, School of International Arbitration, and Pricewaterhouse Coopers LLP, International
Arbitration: Corporate Attitudes and Practices 2008, available online at http://www.pwc.co.uk/en_UK/uk/assets/pdf/

Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638674 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
pwc-international-arbitration-2008.pdf, pp. 8 and 10, which suggested that in only 11 per cent of cases did participants
need to proceed to enforce an award and, in those cases, in less than 20 per cent did enforcing parties encounter difficulties
in enforcement.
6
See, e.g., ‘The Guide to Challenging and Enforcing Arbitration Awards’, (2nd edn, 2021) General Editor J. William
Rowley Q.C., Law Business Research Ltd., observing at p. xiv that ‘in the first three months of 2021, there has not
been a day when the news reports have not headlined the attack on, survival of, or a successful or failed attempt to
enforce an arbitral award’.
7
For instance, by the winding up of a company.
8
GAFTA Form 125, Arbitration Rules (effective for contracts dated from 1 September 2018 onwards), Art. 24.1.
9
In recent years, the record of overwhelming voluntary performance has been eroded somewhat. Nevertheless, voluntary
performance remains the norm. For a description of the voluntary performance of ICSID awards, see Chapter 8.
10
For other examples of monetising an arbitral award, see ‘The Guide to Challenging and Enforcing Arbitration Awards’,
2nd edn, General Editor J. William Rowley Q.C., Law Business Research Ltd., pp. 8-10.
11
See, e.g., ICC Rules, Art. 42 (‘the Court and the arbitral tribunal shall act in the spirit of the Rules and shall make every
effort to make sure that the award is enforceable at law’); LCIA Rules, Art. 32.2 (providing that the tribunal ‘shall make
every reasonable effort to ensure that any award is legally recognised and enforceable at the arbitral seat’); SIAC Rules,
Art. 41.2 (providing that the tribunal ‘shall make every reasonable effort to ensure the fair, expeditious and economical
conclusion of the arbitration and the enforceability of any Award’); WIPO Rules Arbitration Rules, Art. 64.e (providing
that the ‘Tribunal may consult the Center with regard to matters of form, particularly to ensure the enforceability of
the award’).
12
The successful party may sometimes seek recognition and enforcement of an award in a country in which the losing
party may have no assets in order (so to speak) to obtain the imprimatur of a respected court upon the award.
13
Taurus Petroleum Ltd v State Oil Marketing Co. of the Ministry of Oil, Iraq [2017] UKSC 64.
14
As, e.g., under the Swiss Private International Law Act 1987 (Swiss PIL) (as amended in 2021), Ch. 12, s. 193. See
also the Egyptian Ministerial Decree, made under s. 47 of the Egyptian Arbitration Law No. 27 of 1994 (as amended
in 2017). Further, see also the Italian Code of Civil Procedure (Book 4, Title VIII, ‘Arbitration’), art. 825—as amended
by Legislative Decree No. 40, 2 February 2006.
15
As, e.g., in England, under the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 66. See also s. 35(2) of the Australian International
Arbitration Act 1974, as amended. Further, see also s. 19 of the Singaporean International Arbitration Act 1994, as
amended in 2020.
16
As, e.g., in France, under art. 1487 of the Code of Civil Procedure, as modified by Decree No. 2011-48 of 13 January
2011. See also art. 66(d) of Law No. 30 of 1999 Concerning Arbitration and Alternative Dispute Resolution. Further,
see also art. 518 of the Argentinian National Code of Civil and Commercial Procedure (Further Articles).
17
See ‘The Guide to Challenging and Enforcing Arbitration Awards’, General Editor J. William Rowley Q.C. (Global
Arbitration Review, 2019) Law Business Research Ltd.
18
The second edition of the Guide includes a useful note on state immunity and responses to questions from lawyers in
additional jurisdictions, including China.
19
Enforcement provisions in China, similarly, differentiate between purely domestic awards and those awards that have
been made in the People’s Republic of China (PRC), but have a foreign element, such as (a) a foreign party, (b) the
relevant relationship was formed, changed, or terminated in a foreign country, or (c) the subject matter of the dispute
is situated outside the PRC.
20
The New York Convention, the full title of which is the ‘Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards’ (emphasis added), also applies to arbitral awards that are ‘not considered as domestic awards in the
State where their recognition and enforcement is sought’ (Art. 1(1)). This may lead to an award made in one state being
enforced in that same state under the New York Convention, on the basis that it is not regarded as a domestic award.
21
In Arts I, IV, and V—but Art. V also speaks of ‘recognition or enforcement’ (emphasis added).
22
The usage is followed in the English Arbitration Act 1996, which distinguishes between the ‘recognition’ of a New
York Convention award (s. 101(1)) and its ‘enforcement’ (s. 101(2)). The statute also makes this distinction in other
relevant sections.
23
As happened, e.g., in Dallal v Bank Mellat [1986] QB 441, in which the English judge held that an award of the
Iran–United States Claims Tribunal was not enforceable under the New York Convention, but should nevertheless be
recognised as the valid judgment of a competent tribunal. The case is also reported in (1986) XI YBCA 547, at 553.
24
Although, in some countries, it may be a necessary step along the way to enforcement.
25
As expressed in the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 101(1), the award is recognised ‘as binding on the persons as
between whom it was made’, so that it may accordingly be used by these persons ‘by way of defence, set-off or otherwise’
in any legal proceedings in England and Wales or Northern Ireland.

Section A. - Background, UKBC-REDFERN 530638674 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
26
For a discussion of state immunity, see paragraphs 11.152ff.
27
Local law advice is also necessary to establish whether the local courts will have the necessary jurisdiction over the
persons and assets against which enforcement is sought.
28
The chosen place of arbitration is a geographical location in a given country, or more usually, in a given town or city. The
arbitration agreement may state e.g. that any arbitration is to take place in Paris, or that it is to take place in New York,
or wherever it may be. But, as has been seen in Chapter 3, once chosen, the physical ‘place’ of arbitration becomes the
juridical ‘seat’ of the arbitration—an event that may have important legal consequences, depending on the lex arbitri.
29
See paragraphs 11.34ff.
30
While the existence of assets within a particular jurisdiction is most commonly used as a basis for enforcement in
that jurisdiction, jurisdiction ratione personae over a party can sometimes also be used to seize assets outside the
jurisdiction in which enforcement is sought. The New York Court of Appeals has held, in Koehler v Bank of Bermuda
Ltd, 12 NY.3d 533 (2009), that assets located outside New York can be ordered to be brought within the jurisdiction for
enforcement purposes, as long as a New York court has jurisdiction over the owner or custodian of those assets: see
Friedman, ‘Enforcement of international arbitration awards in New York: If you take them there, you can collect from
anywhere’ (2011) 27 Arb Intl 575.
31
This Regulation replaces the Brussels Convention of 1968.
32
See Chapter 1.
33
Recognition and enforcement is likely to be easiest to obtain under an international convention where the forum state
is bound by such a convention, but other methods of recognition and enforcement may be available, as discussed at
paragraphs 11.139ff. The Guide to Challenging and Enforcing Arbitration Awards, referenced in paragraph 11.13, notes
any applicable Conventions in the jurisdictions covered in Part II of the Guide.
34
See also English Limitation Act 1980, s. 7: ‘An action to enforce an award, where the submission is not by an instrument
under seal, shall not be brought after the expiration of six years from the date on which the cause of action accrued.’ For
India, the equivalent period is three years under the Limitation Act 1963, Sch. 1, para. 101. The Canadian Supreme Court
has concluded that domestic limitation periods are applicable to enforcing awards under the New York Convention:
Yugraneft Corporation v Rexx Management Corporation [2010] SCC 19.
35
See New York Convention, Art. V(1)(b); Model Law (as amended in 2006), Art. 36(1)(a)(ii).
36
For example, the ICC Rules, the LCIA Rules, UNCITRAL Rules, or ICSID Additional Facility Rules.
37
See ICSID Convention, Art. 54.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
