Section E. - Effects of Challenge, UKBC-REDFERN 530638669 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section E. - Effects of Challenge
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 10 - Challenge of Arbitral Awards
Section E. - Effects of Challenge
10. 89
The effects of a successful challenge differ depending upon the grounds of the challenge, the relevant law, and the decision of
the court that dealt with it. The court’s decision may take several forms. The court may decide to confirm the award, refer the
award back to the arbitral tribunal for reconsideration, vary the award, or set the award aside, in whole or in part.
10. 90
When an award is set aside, it is unenforceable in the country in which it was made, and it will usually be unenforceable
elsewhere. 149  In this situation, the party that won the arbitration, but lost the challenge, is in an unenviable position. If, for
example, the award has been set aside completely on the basis that the arbitration agreement was null and void, a further resort
to arbitration (on the basis of the void agreement) would be out of the question. Resort to litigation might be considered, but
there could be problems of statute of limitations, to say nothing of more substantive difficulties.
10. 91
If the award has been set aside for procedural defects (e.g. lack of due process), the party who won the arbitration, but lost the
challenge, will have to resubmit the dispute to arbitration and the process will start over again. This is a daunting prospect for
even the most resilient claimant.
10. 92
A successful party does not wish to be deprived of victory because of a procedural failure on the part of the arbitral tribunal. As
the practice of international arbitration becomes increasingly litigious, a party that expects to be on the losing side may seek,
during the course of the proceedings, to lay the basis for a claim that the hearing was not conducted fairly. This point should be
kept well in mind by parties to an arbitration (usually the claimants) who consider that the arbitral tribunal is being too generous
to their opponents on procedural questions. In order to minimise the risk of challenges to the award based on the alleged unfair
conduct of the hearing, arbitrators often ask the parties to confirm after the last oral hearing whether they have been satisfied
with the conduct of the hearing, in order to protect the eventual award from challenge. If a party then declares a concern, there
is still time for the tribunal to address it before issuing the final award.
Footnotes
149
But see fn. 8 above and the discussion in Chapter 11 relating to cases in which an award has been set aside at the seat
of the arbitration but has nevertheless been enforced in another country.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
