Article 23(1): Drawing up and contents of the Terms of..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 23(1): Drawing up and contents of the Terms of Reference
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 23(1): Drawing up and contents of the Terms of Reference
“As soon as it has received the file from the Secretariat, the arbitral tribunal shall draw up, on the basis of documents or in
the presence of the parties and in the light of their most recent submissions, a document defining its Terms of Reference.
This document shall include the following particulars:
 
a)the names in full, description, address and other contact details of each of the parties and of any person(s)
representing a party in the arbitration;
 
b)the addresses to which notifications and communications arising in the course of the arbitration may be made;
 
c)a summary of the parties’ respective claims and of the relief sought by each party, together with the amounts of any
quantified claims and, to the extent possible, an estimate of the monetary value of any other claims;
 
d)unless the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate, a list of issues to be determined;
 
e)the names in full, address and other contact details of each of the arbitrators;
 
f)the place of the arbitration; and
 
g)particulars of the applicable procedural rules and, if such is the case, reference to the power conferred upon the
arbitral tribunal to act as amiable compositeur or to decide ex aequo et bono.”
23-10
The Secretariat transmits the file to the Tribunal as soon as it has been constituted and the provisional advance on costs has
been paid in accordance with art.16.
23-11
Upon receipt of the file, the president will take the initiative to organise the work of the Tribunal and usually to prepare the
initial draft of the Terms of Reference. It is basically the president’s responsibility to ensure that the Terms of Reference are
signed within 30 days after transmittal of the file to the Tribunal.
23-12
In the initial draft of the Terms of Reference, the Tribunal usually summarises the procedure to date. This is useful to provide
the reader with an outline of the procedural aspects of the dispute and to ensure that no material communication or element
has been omitted in the initial review of the file.
23-13
The Terms of Reference are to be drawn up “on the basis of documents or in the presence of the parties and in the light of their
most recent submissions”. The initial drafting of the Terms of Reference occurs almost invariably prior to any such meeting.
Whether a meeting will be held depends on a number of factors discussed under art.24.
23-14

Article 23(1): Drawing up and contents of the Terms of..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
The Rules do not define what is meant by the “most recent submissions”. The submissions include the Request and the
respondent’s Answer thereto as well as any claims against the claimant and the Reply to such claims or claims against an
additional party and the latter’s Reply thereto. 299  In addition, the general view is that parties’ other submissions will be taken
into consideration whether in the form of amendments to the Request or Answer or in the form of letters—including letters sent
as comments on drafts of the Terms of Reference. Such submissions may occur prior to transmission of the file or at any time
prior to the signing of the Terms of Reference. It is not infrequent that the respondent in such cases makes a submission relating
to its defence or a counterclaim immediately prior to the signing of the Terms of Reference. The Tribunal then usually takes
this submission into account in the Terms of Reference.
23-15
This relative flexibility in ICC arbitration may be surprising to lawyers used to complying with the pleading requirements
of national court systems. However, arbitration, unlike court procedure, is intended to be flexible, so that each arbitration
can resolve as many disputes between the parties as possible. With parties from different legal systems, the Tribunal will be
conscious of the fact that some lawyers may not be familiar with general ICC practice and that such last-minute submissions
may be a direct result of the relative novelty of the proceedings. There are seldom due process issues at this stage as claims or
counterclaims added prior to signing of the Terms of Reference will be the subject of further memorials and evidence. What is
more, a Tribunal always prefers to have a party participate in the proceedings, albeit with last-minute submissions.
23-16
As noted, the president usually prepares the first draft of the Terms of Reference that is submitted to the co-arbitrators for their
comments. The president may well send the initial draft to the Secretariat to give it the possibility of an informal “compliance
check”, although the Secretariat will, in any event, receive a copy when the draft Terms of Reference are sent to the parties. 300
After receiving the comments of the co-arbitrators, the president will then circulate a draft to the parties for their comments. 301
Based on those comments, the president will revise the Terms of Reference in consultation with the co-arbitrators. If there are
no substantial difficulties, a final draft of the Terms of Reference will be prepared for signing. If there are substantial difficulties,
the Tribunal may prefer to hold a meeting to clarify the issues. The discussion of any outstanding issues with the draft Terms
of Reference is usually held at the case management conference discussed under art.24, which can take place by telephone or
videoconference or at a physical meeting.
23-17
The key issues regarding drafting of the Terms of Reference relate to paras (c) the description of the claims of the parties and
the relief sought, (d) the issues to be decided and (g) the applicable procedural rules to be followed are discussed below. 302
Footnotes
299
See art.7(1) and (4).
300
As per the general requirement of art.3(1) 2nd sentence.
301
The Secretariat may provide comments too, and this is why it is always preferable to send the early draft to the Secretariat,
particularly if the respondent is not participating in the arbitration.
302
See para.23-3.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
