Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in
International Commercial Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial Arbitration
(Adopted by a resolution of the IBA Council on 17 December 2020)
The Rules
Preamble
1. These IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration are intended to provide an efficient, economical
and fair process for the taking of evidence in international arbitrations, particularly those between Parties from different
legal traditions. They are designed to supplement the legal provisions and the institutional, ad hoc or other rules that apply
to the conduct of the arbitration.
2. Parties and Arbitral Tribunals may adopt the IBA Rules of Evidence, in whole or in part, to govern arbitration
proceedings, or they may vary them or use them as guidelines in developing their own procedures. The Rules are not
intended to limit the flexibility that is inherent in, and an advantage of, international arbitration, and Parties and Arbitral
Tribunals are free to adapt them to the particular circumstances of each arbitration.
3. The taking of evidence shall be conducted on the principles that each Party shall act in good faith and be entitled to
know, reasonably in advance of any Evidentiary Hearing or any fact or merits determination, the evidence on which the
other Parties rely.
Definitions
In the IBA Rules of Evidence:
‘Arbitral Tribunal’ means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators;
‘Claimant’ means the Party or Parties who commenced the arbitration and any Party who, through joinder or otherwise,
becomes aligned with such Party or Parties;
‘Document’ means a writing, communication, picture, drawing, program or data of any kind, whether recorded or
maintained on paper or by electronic, audio, visual or any other means;
‘Evidentiary Hearing’ means any hearing, whether or not held on consecutive days, at which the Arbitral Tribunal, whether
in person, by teleconference, videoconference or other method, receives oral or other evidence;
‘Expert Report’ means a written statement by a Tribunal-Appointed Expert or a Party-Appointed Expert;
‘General Rules’ mean the institutional, ad hoc or other rules that apply to the conduct of the arbitration;
‘IBA Rules of Evidence’ or ‘Rules’ means these IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration, as they
may be revised or amended from time to time;
‘Party’ means a party to the arbitration;
‘Party-Appointed Expert’ means a person or organisation appointed by a Party in order to report on specific issues
determined by the Party;

Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
‘Remote Hearing’ means a hearing conducted, for the entire hearing or parts thereof, or only with respect to certain
participants, using teleconference, videoconference or other communication technology by which persons in more than
one location simultaneously participate;
‘Request to Produce’ means a written request by a Party that another Party produce Documents;
‘Respondent’ means the Party or Parties against whom the Claimant made its claim, and any Party who, through joinder
or otherwise, becomes aligned with such Party or Parties, and includes a Respondent making a counterclaim;
‘Tribunal-Appointed Expert’ means a person or organisation appointed by the Arbitral Tribunal in order to report to it on
specific issues determined by the Arbitral Tribunal; and
‘Witness Statement’ means a written statement of testimony by a witness of fact.
Article 1 Scope of Application
1. Whenever the Parties have agreed or the Arbitral Tribunal has determined to apply the IBA Rules of Evidence,
the Rules shall govern the taking of evidence, except to the extent that any specific provision of them may be found
to be in conflict with any mandatory provision of law determined to be applicable to the case by the Parties or by
the Arbitral Tribunal.
2. Where the Parties have agreed to apply the IBA Rules of Evidence, in whole or in part, they shall be deemed to
have agreed, in the absence of a contrary indication, to the version as current on the date of such agreement.
3. In case of conflict between any provisions of the IBA Rules of Evidence and the General Rules, the Arbitral
Tribunal shall apply the IBA Rules of Evidence in the manner that it determines best in order to accomplish, to the
extent possible, the purposes of both the General Rules and the IBA Rules of Evidence, unless the Parties agree to
the contrary.
4. In the event of any dispute regarding the meaning of the IBA Rules of Evidence, the Arbitral Tribunal shall interpret
them according to their purpose and in the manner most appropriate for the particular arbitration.
5. Insofar as the IBA Rules of Evidence and the General Rules are silent on any matter concerning the taking of
evidence and the Parties have not agreed otherwise, the Arbitral Tribunal shall conduct the taking of evidence as it
deems appropriate, in accordance with the general principles of the IBA Rules of Evidence.
Article 2 Consultation on Evidentiary Issues
1. The Arbitral Tribunal shall consult the Parties at the earliest appropriate time in the proceedings and invite them to
consult each other with a view to agreeing on an efficient, economical and fair process for the taking of evidence.
2. The consultation on evidentiary issues may address the scope, timing and manner of the taking of evidence,
including, to the extent applicable:
 
(a) the preparation and submission of Witness Statements and Expert Reports;
 
(b) the taking of oral testimony at any Evidentiary Hearing;
 
(c) the requirements, procedure and format applicable to the production of Documents;
 
(d) the level of confidentiality protection to be afforded to evidence in the arbitration;
 
(e) the treatment of any issues of cybersecurity and data protection; and

Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
(f) the promotion of efficiency, economy and conservation of resources in connection with the taking of
evidence.
3. The Arbitral Tribunal is encouraged to identify to the Parties, as soon as it considers it to be appropriate, any issues:
 
(a) that the Arbitral Tribunal may regard as relevant to the case and material to its outcome; and/ or
 
(b) for which a preliminary determination may be appropriate.
Article 3 Documents
1. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, each Party shall submit to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the other
Parties all Documents available to it on which it relies, including public Documents and those in the public domain,
except for any Documents that have already been submitted by another Party.
2. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, any Party may submit to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the other
Parties a Request to Produce.
3. A Request to Produce shall contain:
 
(a)
 
(i) a description of each requested Document sufficient to identify it, or
 
(ii) a description in sufficient detail (including subject matter) of a narrow and specific
requested category of Documents that are reasonably believed to exist; in the case of
Documents maintained in electronic form, the requesting Party may, or the Arbitral
Tribunal may order that it shall be required to, identify specific files, search terms,
individuals or other means of searching for such Documents in an efficient and economical
manner;
 
(b) a statement as to how the Documents requested are relevant to the case and material to its outcome; and
 
(c)
 
(i) a statement that the Documents requested are not in the possession, custody or control
of the requesting Party or a statement of the reasons why it would be unreasonably
burdensome for the requesting Party to produce such Documents, and
 
(ii) a statement of the reasons why the requesting Party assumes the Documents requested
are in the possession, custody or control of another Party.
4. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, the Party to whom the Request to Produce is addressed shall
produce to the other Parties and, if the Arbitral Tribunal so orders, to it, all the Documents requested in its possession,
custody or control as to which it makes no objection.
5. If the Party to whom the Request to Produce is addressed has an objection to some or all of the Documents requested,
it shall state the objection in writing to the Arbitral Tribunal and the other Parties within the time ordered by the
Arbitral Tribunal. The reasons for such objection shall be any of those set forth in Articles 9.2 or 9.3, or a failure to
satisfy any of the requirements of Article 3.3. If so directed by the Arbitral Tribunal, and within the time so ordered,
the requesting party may respond to the objection.

Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
6. Upon receipt of any such objection and response, the Arbitral Tribunal may invite the relevant Parties to consult
with each other with a view to resolving the objection.
7. Either Party may, within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, request the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on the
objection. The Arbitral Tribunal shall then, in timely fashion, consider the Request to Produce, the objection and
any response thereto. The Arbitral Tribunal may order the Party to whom such Request is addressed to produce any
requested Document in its possession, custody or control as to which the Arbitral Tribunal determines that (i) the
issues that the requesting Party wishes to prove are relevant to the case and material to its outcome; (ii) none of
the reasons for objection set forth in Articles 9.2 or 9.3 applies; and (iii) the requirements of Article 3.3 have been
satisfied. Any such Document shall be produced to the other Parties and, if the Arbitral Tribunal so orders, to it.
8. In exceptional circumstances, if the propriety of an objection can be determined only by review of the Document,
the Arbitral Tribunal may determine that it should not review the Document. In that event, the Arbitral Tribunal may,
after consultation with the Parties, appoint an independent and impartial expert, bound to confidentiality, to review
any such Document and to report on the objection. To the extent that the objection is upheld by the Arbitral Tribunal,
the expert shall not disclose to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the other Parties the contents of the Document reviewed.
9. If a Party wishes to obtain the production of Documents from a person or organisation who is not a Party to the
arbitration and from whom the Party cannot obtain the Documents on its own, the Party may, within the time ordered
by the Arbitral Tribunal, ask it to take whatever steps are legally available to obtain the requested Documents, or seek
leave from the Arbitral Tribunal to take such steps itself. The Party shall submit such request to the Arbitral Tribunal
and to the other Parties in writing, and the request shall contain the particulars set forth in Article 3.3, as applicable.
The Arbitral Tribunal shall decide on this request and shall take, authorize the requesting Party to take, or order any
other Party to take, such steps as the Arbitral Tribunal considers appropriate if, in its discretion, it determines that
(i) the Documents would be relevant to the case and material to its outcome, (ii) the requirements of Article 3.3, as
applicable, have been satisfied and (iii) none of the reasons for objection set forth in Articles 9.2 or 9.3 applies.
10. At any time before the arbitration is concluded, the Arbitral Tribunal may (i) request any Party to produce
Documents, (ii) request any Party to use its best efforts to take or (iii) itself take, any step that it considers appropriate
to obtain Documents from any person or organisation. Any Party may object to the request for any of the reasons set
forth in Articles 9.2 or 9.3. In such cases, Article 3.4 to Article 3.8 shall apply correspondingly.
11. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, the Parties may submit to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the other
Parties any additional Documents on which they intend to rely or which they believe have become relevant to the
case and material to its outcome as a consequence of the issues raised in Documents, Witness Statements or Expert
Reports submitted or produced, or in other submissions of the Parties.
12. With respect to the form of submission or production of Documents, unless the Parties agree otherwise or, in the
absence of such agreement, the Arbitral Tribunal decides otherwise:
 
(a) copies of Documents shall conform to the originals and, at the request of the Arbitral Tribunal, any
original shall be presented for inspection;
 
(b) Documents that a Party maintains in electronic form shall be submitted or produced in the form most
convenient or economical to it that is reasonably usable by the recipients;
 
(c) a Party is not obligated to produce multiple copies of Documents which are essentially identical;
 
(d) Documents to be produced in response to a Request to Produce need not be translated; and
 
(e) Documents in a language other than the language of the arbitration that are submitted to the Arbitral
Tribunal shall be accompanied by translations marked as such.
13. Any Document submitted or produced by a Party or non-Party in the arbitration and not otherwise in the public
domain shall be kept confidential by the Arbitral Tribunal and the other Parties, and shall be used only in connection
with the arbitration. This requirement shall apply except and to the extent that disclosure may be required of a Party

Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
to fulfil a legal duty, protect or pursue a legal right, or enforce or challenge an award in bona fide legal proceedings
before a state court or other judicial authority. The Arbitral Tribunal may issue orders to set forth the terms of this
confidentiality. This requirement shall be without prejudice to all other obligations of confidentiality in the arbitration.
14. If the arbitration is organised into separate issues or phases (such as jurisdiction, preliminary determinations,
liability or damages), the Arbitral Tribunal may, after consultation with the Parties, schedule the submission of
Documents and Requests to Produce separately for each issue or phase.
Article 4 Witnesses of Fact
1. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, each Party shall identify the witnesses on whose testimony it
intends to rely and the subject matter of that testimony.
2. Any person may present evidence as a witness, including a Party or a Party’s officer, employee or other
representative.
3. It shall not be improper for a Party, its officers, employees, legal advisors or other representatives to interview its
witnesses or potential witnesses and to discuss their prospective testimony with them.
4. The Arbitral Tribunal may order each Party to submit within a specified time to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the
other Parties Witness Statements by each witness on whose testimony it intends to rely, except for those witnesses
whose testimony is sought pursuant to Articles 4.9 or 4.10. If Evidentiary Hearings are organised into separate issues
or phases (such as jurisdiction, preliminary determinations, liability or damages), the Arbitral Tribunal or the Parties
by agreement may schedule the submission of Witness Statements separately for each issue or phase.
5. Each Witness Statement shall contain:
 
(a) the full name and address of the witness, a statement regarding his or her present and past relationship
(if any) with any of the Parties, and a description of his or her background, qualifications, training and
experience, if such a description may be relevant to the dispute or to the contents of the statement;
 
(b) a full and detailed description of the facts, and the source of the witness’s information as to those facts,
sufficient to serve as that witness’s evidence in the matter in dispute. Documents on which the witness
relies that have not already been submitted shall be provided;
 
(c) a statement as to the language in which the Witness Statement was originally prepared and the language
in which the witness anticipates giving testimony at the Evidentiary Hearing;
 
(d) an affirmation of the truth of the Witness Statement; and
 
(e) the signature of the witness and its date and place.
6. If Witness Statements are submitted, any Party may, within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, submit to the
Arbitral Tribunal and to the other Parties revised or additional Witness Statements, including statements from persons
not previously named as witnesses, so long as any such revisions or additions respond only to:
 
(a) matters contained in another Party’s Witness Statements, Expert Reports or other submissions that have
not been previously presented in the arbitration; or
 
(b) new factual developments that could not have been addressed in a previous Witness Statement.
7. If a witness whose appearance has been requested pursuant to Article 8.1 fails without a valid reason to appear
for testimony at an Evidentiary Hearing, the Arbitral Tribunal shall disregard any Witness Statement related to that
Evidentiary Hearing by that witness unless, in exceptional circumstances, the Arbitral Tribunal decides otherwise.

Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
8. If the appearance of a witness has not been requested pursuant to Article 8.1, none of the other Parties shall be
deemed to have agreed to the correctness of the content of the Witness Statement.
9. If a Party wishes to present evidence from a person who will not appear voluntarily at its request, the Party may,
within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, ask it to take whatever steps are legally available to obtain the
testimony of that person, or seek leave from the Arbitral Tribunal to take such steps itself. In the case of a request to
the Arbitral Tribunal, the Party shall identify the intended witness, shall describe the subjects on which the witness’s
testimony is sought and shall state why such subjects are relevant to the case and material to its outcome. The Arbitral
Tribunal shall decide on this request and shall take, authorize the requesting Party to take or order any other Party to
take, such steps as the Arbitral Tribunal considers appropriate if, in its discretion, it determines that the testimony of
that witness would be relevant to the case and material to its outcome.
10. At any time before the arbitration is concluded, the Arbitral Tribunal may order any Party to provide for, or to use
its best efforts to provide for, the appearance for testimony at an Evidentiary Hearing of any person, including one
whose testimony has not yet been offered. Any Party may object for any of the reasons set forth in Articles 9.2 or 9.3.
Article 5 Party-Appointed Experts
1. A Party may rely on a Party-Appointed Expert as a means of evidence on specific issues. Within the time ordered
by the Arbitral Tribunal, (i) each Party shall identify any Party-Appointed Expert on whose testimony it intends to
rely and the subject-matter of such testimony; and (ii) the Party-Appointed Expert shall submit an Expert Report.
2. The Expert Report shall contain:
 
(a) the full name and address of the Party-Appointed Expert, a statement regarding his or her present and
past relationship (if any) with any of the Parties, their legal advisors and the Arbitral Tribunal, and a
description of his or her background, qualifications, training and experience;
 
(b) a description of the instructions pursuant to which he or she is providing his or her opinions and
conclusions;
 
(c) a statement of his or her independence from the Parties, their legal advisors and the Arbitral Tribunal;
 
(d) a statement of the facts on which he or she is basing his or her expert opinions and conclusions;
 
(e) his or her expert opinions and conclusions, including a description of the methods, evidence and
information used in arriving at the conclusions. Documents on which the Party-Appointed Expert relies
that have not already been submitted shall be provided;
 
(f) if the Expert Report has been translated, a statement as to the language in which it was originally
prepared, and the language in which the Party-Appointed Expert anticipates giving testimony at the
Evidentiary Hearing;
 
(g) an affirmation of his or her genuine belief in the opinions expressed in the Expert Report;
 
(h) the signature of the Party-Appointed Expert and its date and place; and
 
(i) if the Expert Report has been signed by more than one person, an attribution of the entirety or specific
parts of the Expert Report to each author.
3. If Expert Reports are submitted, any Party may, within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, submit to the
Arbitral Tribunal and to the other Parties revised or additional Expert Reports, including reports or statements from
persons not previously identified as Party-Appointed Experts, so long as any such revisions or additions respond
only to:
 
(a) matters contained in another Party’s Witness Statements, Expert Reports or other submissions that have
not been previously presented in the arbitration; or

Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
 
(b) new developments that could not have been addressed in a previous Expert Report.
4. The Arbitral Tribunal in its discretion may order that any Party-Appointed Experts who will submit or who have
submitted Expert Reports on the same or related issues meet and confer on such issues. At such meeting, the Party-
Appointed Experts shall attempt to reach agreement on the issues within the scope of their Expert Reports, and they
shall record in writing any such issues on which they reach agreement, any remaining areas of disagreement and the
reasons therefor.
5. If a Party-Appointed Expert whose appearance has been requested pursuant to Article 8.1 fails without a valid
reason to appear for testimony at an Evidentiary Hearing, the Arbitral Tribunal shall disregard any Expert Report
by that Party-Appointed Expert related to that Evidentiary Hearing unless, in exceptional circumstances, the Arbitral
Tribunal decides otherwise.
6. If the appearance of a Party-Appointed Expert has not been requested pursuant to Article 8.1, none of the other
Parties shall be deemed to have agreed to the correctness of the content of the Expert Report.
Article 6 Tribunal-Appointed Experts
1. The Arbitral Tribunal, after consulting with the Parties, may appoint one or more independent Tribunal-Appointed
Experts to report to it on specific issues designated by the Arbitral Tribunal. The Arbitral Tribunal shall establish the
terms of reference for any Tribunal-Appointed Expert Report after consulting with the Parties. A copy of the final
terms of reference shall be sent by the Arbitral Tribunal to the Parties.
2. The Tribunal-Appointed Expert shall, before accepting appointment, submit to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the
Parties a description of his or her qualifications and a statement of his or her independence from the Parties,
their legal advisors and the Arbitral Tribunal. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, the Parties shall
inform the Arbitral Tribunal whether they have any objections as to the Tribunal-Appointed Expert’s qualifications
and independence. The Arbitral Tribunal shall decide promptly whether to accept any such objection. After the
appointment of a Tribunal-Appointed Expert, a Party may object to the expert’s qualifications or independence only
if the objection is for reasons of which the Party becomes aware after the appointment has been made. The Arbitral
Tribunal shall decide promptly what, if any, action to take.
3. Subject to the provisions of Articles 9.2 and 9.3, the Tribunal-Appointed Expert may request a Party to provide
any information or to provide access to any Documents, goods, samples, property, machinery, systems, processes or
site for inspection, to the extent relevant to the case and material to its outcome. The Parties and their representatives
shall have the right to receive any such information and to attend any such inspection. Any disagreement between
a Tribunal-Appointed Expert and a Party as to the relevance, materiality or appropriateness of such a request shall
be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal, in the manner provided in Articles 3.5 through 3.8. The Tribunal-Appointed
Expert shall record in the Expert Report any non-compliance by a Party with an appropriate request or decision by
the Arbitral Tribunal and shall describe its effects on the determination of the specific issue.
4. The Tribunal-Appointed Expert shall report in writing to the Arbitral Tribunal in an Expert Report. The Expert
Report shall contain:
 
(a) the full name and address of the Tribunal-Appointed Expert, and a description of his or her background,
qualifications, training and experience;
 
(b) a statement of the facts on which he or she is basing his or her expert opinions and conclusions;
 
(c) his or her expert opinions and conclusions, including a description of the methods, evidence and
information used in arriving at the conclusions. Documents on which the Tribunal-Appointed Expert
relies that have not already been submitted shall be provided;

Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
 
(d) if the Expert Report has been translated, a statement as to the language in which it was originally
prepared, and the language in which the Tribunal-Appointed Expert anticipates giving testimony at the
Evidentiary Hearing;
 
(e) an affirmation of his or her genuine belief in the opinions expressed in the Expert Report;
 
(f) the signature of the Tribunal-Appointed Expert and its date and place; and
 
(g) if the Expert Report has been signed by more than one person, an attribution of the entirety or specific
parts of the Expert Report to each author.
5. The Arbitral Tribunal shall send a copy of such Expert Report to the Parties. The Parties may examine any
information, Documents, goods, samples, property, machinery, systems, processes or site for inspection that the
Tribunal-Appointed Expert has examined and any correspondence between the Arbitral Tribunal and the Tribunal-
Appointed Expert. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, any Party shall have the opportunity to respond
to the Expert Report in a submission by the Party or through a Witness Statement or an Expert Report by a Party-
Appointed Expert. The Arbitral Tribunal shall send the submission, Witness Statement or Expert Report to the
Tribunal-Appointed Expert and to the other Parties.
6. At the request of a Party or of the Arbitral Tribunal, the Tribunal-Appointed Expert shall be present at an Evidentiary
Hearing. The Arbitral Tribunal may question the Tribunal-Appointed Expert, and he or she may be questioned by the
Parties or by any Party-Appointed Expert on issues raised in his or her Expert Report, the Parties’ submissions or
Witness Statement or the Expert Reports made by the Party-Appointed Experts pursuant to Article 6.5.
7. Any Expert Report made by a Tribunal-Appointed Expert and its conclusions shall be assessed by the Arbitral
Tribunal with due regard to all circumstances of the case.
8. The fees and expenses of a Tribunal-Appointed Expert, to be funded in a manner determined by the Arbitral
Tribunal, shall form part of the costs of the arbitration.
Article 7 Inspection
Subject to the provisions of Articles 9.2 and 9.3, the Arbitral Tribunal may, at the request of a Party or on its own
motion, inspect or require the inspection by a Tribunal-Appointed Expert or a Party-Appointed Expert of any site,
property, machinery or any other goods, samples, systems, processes or Documents, as it deems appropriate. The
Arbitral Tribunal shall, in consultation with the Parties, determine the timing and arrangements for the inspection.
The Parties and their representatives shall have the right to attend any such inspection.
Article 8 Evidentiary Hearing
1. Within the time ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal, each Party shall inform the Arbitral Tribunal and the other Parties
of the witnesses whose appearance it requests. Each witness (which term includes, for the purposes of this Article,
witnesses of fact and any experts) shall, subject to Article 8.3, appear for testimony at the Evidentiary Hearing if such
person’s appearance has been requested by any Party or by the Arbitral Tribunal.
2. At the request of a Party or on its own motion, the Arbitral Tribunal may, after consultation with the Parties, order
that the Evidentiary Hearing be conducted as a Remote Hearing. In that event, the Arbitral Tribunal shall consult with
the Parties with a view to establishing a Remote Hearing protocol to conduct the Remote Hearing efficiently, fairly
and, to the extent possible, without unintended interruptions. The protocol may address:
 
(a) the technology to be used;
 
(b) advance testing of the technology or training in use of the technology;

Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
 
(c) the starting and ending times considering, in particular, the time zones in which participants will be
located;
 
(d) how Documents may be placed before a witness or the Arbitral Tribunal; and
 
(e) measures to ensure that witnesses giving oral testimony are not improperly influenced or distracted.
3. The Arbitral Tribunal shall at all times have complete control over the Evidentiary Hearing. The Arbitral Tribunal
may limit or exclude any question to, answer by or appearance of a witness, if it considers such question, answer
or appearance to be irrelevant, immaterial, unreasonably burdensome, duplicative or otherwise covered by a reason
for objection set forth in Articles 9.2 or 9.3. Questions to a witness during direct and re-direct testimony may not
be unreasonably leading.
4. With respect to oral testimony at an Evidentiary Hearing:
 
(a) the Claimant shall ordinarily first present the testimony of its witnesses, followed by the Respondent
presenting the testimony of its witnesses;
 
(b) following direct testimony, any other Party may question such witness, in an order to be determined
by the Arbitral Tribunal. The Party who initially presented the witness shall subsequently have the
opportunity to ask additional questions on the matters raised in the other Parties’ questioning;
 
(c) thereafter, the Claimant shall ordinarily first present the testimony of its Party-Appointed Experts,
followed by the Respondent presenting the testimony of its Party-Appointed Experts. The Party who
initially presented the Party-Appointed Expert shall subsequently have the opportunity to ask additional
questions on the matters raised in the other Parties’ questioning;
 
(d) the Arbitral Tribunal may question a Tribunal-Appointed Expert, and he or she may be questioned by
the Parties or by any Party-Appointed Expert, on issues raised in the Tribunal-Appointed Expert Report,
in the Parties’ submissions or in the Expert Reports made by the Party-Appointed Experts;
 
(e) if the arbitration is organised into separate issues or phases (such as jurisdiction, preliminary
determinations, liability and damages), the Parties may agree or the Arbitral Tribunal may order the
scheduling of testimony separately for each issue or phase;
 
(f) the Arbitral Tribunal, upon request of a Party or on its own motion, may vary this order of proceeding,
including the arrangement of testimony by particular issues or in such a manner that witnesses be
questioned at the same time and in confrontation with each other (witness conferencing);
 
(g) the Arbitral Tribunal may ask questions to a witness at any time.
5. A witness of fact providing testimony shall first affirm, in a manner determined appropriate by the Arbitral Tribunal,
that he or she commits to tell the truth or, in the case of an expert witness, his or her genuine belief in the opinions
to be expressed at the Evidentiary Hearing. If the witness has submitted a Witness Statement or an Expert Report,
the witness shall confirm it. The Parties may agree or the Arbitral Tribunal may order that the Witness Statement or
Expert Report shall serve as that witness’s direct testimony, in which event the Arbitral Tribunal may nevertheless
permit further oral direct testimony.
6. Subject to the provisions of Articles 9.2 and 9.3, the Arbitral Tribunal may request any person to give oral or written
evidence on any issue that the Arbitral Tribunal considers to be relevant to the case and material to its outcome. Any
witness called and questioned by the Arbitral Tribunal may also be questioned by the Parties.
Article 9 Admissibility and Assessment of Evidence
1. The Arbitral Tribunal shall determine the admissibility, relevance, materiality and weight of evidence.

Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
2. The Arbitral Tribunal shall, at the request of a Party or on its own motion, exclude from evidence or production
any Document, statement, oral testimony or inspection, in whole or in part, for any of the following reasons:
 
(a) lack of sufficient relevance to the case or materiality to its outcome;
 
(b) legal impediment or privilege under the legal or ethical rules determined by the Arbitral Tribunal to
be applicable (see Article 9.4 below);
 
(c) unreasonable burden to produce the requested evidence;
 
(d) loss or destruction of the Document that has been shown with reasonable likelihood to have occurred;
 
(e) grounds of commercial or technical confidentiality that the Arbitral Tribunal determines to be
compelling;
 
(f) grounds of special political or institutional sensitivity (including evidence that has been classified as
secret by a government or a public international institution) that the Arbitral Tribunal determines to be
compelling; or
 
(g) considerations of procedural economy, proportionality, fairness or equality of the Parties that the
Arbitral Tribunal determines to be compelling.
3. The Arbitral Tribunal may, at the request of a Party or on its own motion, exclude evidence obtained illegally.
4. In considering issues of legal impediment or privilege under Article 9.2(b), and insofar as permitted by any
mandatory legal or ethical rules that are determined by it to be applicable, the Arbitral Tribunal may take into account:
 
(a) any need to protect the confidentiality of a Document created or statement or oral communication made
in connection with and for the purpose of providing or obtaining legal advice;
 
(b) any need to protect the confidentiality of a Document created or statement or oral communication made
in connection with and for the purpose of settlement negotiations;
 
(c) the expectations of the Parties and their advisors at the time the legal impediment or privilege is said
to have arisen;
 
(d) any possible waiver of any applicable legal impediment or privilege by virtue of consent, earlier
disclosure, affirmative use of the Document, statement, oral communication or advice contained therein,
or otherwise; and
 
(e) the need to maintain fairness and equality as between the Parties, particularly if they are subject to
different legal or ethical rules.
5. The Arbitral Tribunal may, where appropriate, make necessary arrangements to permit Documents to be produced,
and evidence to be presented or considered subject to suitable confidentiality protection.
6. If a Party fails without satisfactory explanation to produce any Document requested in a Request to Produce to
which it has not objected in due time or fails to produce any Document ordered to be produced by the Arbitral Tribunal,
the Arbitral Tribunal may infer that such document would be adverse to the interests of that Party.
7. If a Party fails without satisfactory explanation to make available any other relevant evidence, including testimony,
sought by one Party to which the Party to whom the request was addressed has not objected in due time or fails
to make available any evidence, including testimony, ordered by the Arbitral Tribunal to be produced, the Arbitral
Tribunal may infer that such evidence would be adverse to the interests of that Party.

Appendix E - IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
8. If the Arbitral Tribunal determines that a Party has failed to conduct itself in good faith in the taking of evidence, the
Arbitral Tribunal may, in addition to any other measures available under these Rules, take such failure into account in
its assignment of the costs of the arbitration, including costs arising out of or in connection with the taking of evidence.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
