Costs of Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406912 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Costs of Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Costs of Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings
29-82
The issue of the costs of the Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings is dealt with by art.7 of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. These
costs will normally consist of: (i) the ICC administrative expenses; (ii) the fees and expenses of the Emergency Arbitrator; and
(iii) the parties’ reasonable legal and related costs. In the normal case, the first two cost items will be covered by the US$40,000
lump sum payment that the applicant had to pay when filing the Application (the ICC Costs). This is the amount of the ICC
costs to be stipulated in the Order. US$10,000 will cover the ICC administrative expenses, and the balance of US$30,000 will
cover both the expenses and fees of the Emergency Arbitrator. In the normal case, the expenses of the Emergency Arbitrator
should be minimal, so that the bulk of the US$30,000 balance should go to his or her fees.
29-83
Neither the ICC Court’s President or the ICC Court, nor its Secretariat need to intervene to fix the ICC costs, as they represent
a fixed lump sum. The Emergency Arbitrator will therefore not have to await a decision by one of the ICC’s organs for the
fixing of the ICC costs. They are, in fact, pre-fixed.
29-84
In exceptional cases, the ICC Court’s President can increase the ICC costs, either at the level of the ICC administrative
expenses or of the Emergency Arbitrator’s fees under art.7(2) (first sentence) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. In that case,
the Secretariat will provide the applicant with a (short) time frame in which to pay the increased amount. If no payment is
received, the Application shall be considered withdrawn pursuant to art.7(2) (second sentence) of the Emergency Arbitrator
Rules. Although the Emergency Arbitrator Rules do not say so expressly, the Secretariat has the power to extend this time limit.
29-85
The lump sum increased by the ICC Court’s President will represent the ICC costs, which the Emergency Arbitrator simply
has to allocate in the Order, but will, as such, not fix.
29-86
As a Tribunal must do so in its award, the Emergency Arbitrator must decide in the Order “which of the parties shall bear [the
costs] or in what proportion they shall be borne by the parties”, art.7(3) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. Like an arbitrator,
the Emergency Arbitrator enjoys discretion in allocating costs, be it the ICC costs or the parties’ costs. In practice, it would
appear, however, that the options in allocating the costs are rather limited:
 
(i)if the applicant is unsuccessful in its request for provisional relief, it will have to bear the ICC costs, and possibly also
pay some compensation for the responding party’s legal costs, 598  unless the Emergency Arbitrator decides that each party
should bear its own legal costs;
 
(ii)if the applicant is successful in its request for provisional relief, the Emergency Arbitrator may allocate all or part of
the costs to the respondent party, or have each party bear the costs it has incurred (which would include the ICC costs
advanced by claimant).
29-87
Finally, in both situations, the Emergency Arbitrator might defer the allocation of the costs to the Tribunal. Since the ICC
costs are known in advance, it is the parties’ costs which would then also have to be fixed by the Tribunal. This possibility
would seem to follow from art.29(4) of the Rules, which allows the Tribunal to reallocate the costs of the Emergency Arbitrator

Costs of Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406912 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Proceedings. If it can reallocate the costs, there should be no reason why it could not allocate the costs of these proceedings
ultimately in the final award. 599
Footnotes
598
Given the short time frame, there may be practical difficulties for the parties to submit their actual costs, but the
Emergency Arbitrator may also ask at least for an estimate, which would then serve as a basis for fixing an amount
designed to compensate the legal costs incurred by the prevailing party.
599
See also below as to the power of the Tribunal to reallocate the costs of the Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
