Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special Procedural
Rules) (art.24 Of The Rules)
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part II - Models, Precedents and Examples
Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special Procedural Rules) (art.24 Of The Rules)
II-8
IN THE MATTER OF ARBITRATION
UNDER THE RULES OF ARBITRATION
OF THE INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
BETWEEN:
CLAIMANT (The “Claimant”)
vs/
1. RESPONDENT 1. (“Respondent No.1”)
AND
2. RESPONDENT 2 Ltd. (“Respondent No.2”)
PROCEDURAL ORDER NO.1
(SPECIFIC PROCEDURAL RULES)
10 October 2017
Arbitral Tribunal:
____________, Co-arbitrator
_______________, Co-arbitrator
______________, President
1. Communications
The Claimant, the Respondent No.1 and the Respondent No.2 are herein individually referred to as “Party” or collectively
as the “Parties”. The Respondent No.1 and the Respondent No.2 are collectively referred to as the “Respondents”.
A. Addresses
1.1.
The addresses to be used for any communication during this arbitration are as follows:
The Claimant:
The Respondent No.1: The Respondent No. 1 is currently not participating in these proceedings and has not chosen a
counsel. Its addresses are:
RESPONDENT 1.

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
and
RESPONDENT 1.
The Respondent No.2:
Arbitral Tribunal:
[Co-arbitrator]
[Co-arbitrator]
[President]
ICC Secretariat:
Mr. Tunde Ogunseitan, Counsel
The Secretariat of the International Court of Arbitration
International Chamber of Commerce
33-43 avenue du Président Wilson
75116 Paris
France
Phone: +33 1 49 53 28 36
Email: ica4@iccwbo.org
1.2.
Any change of address, telephone number, telecopier number, e-mail, etc., shall be promptly notified by the Party concerned
to the other Party(-ies), the Arbitral Tribunal and to the ICC Secretariat.
B. Written Statements and Other Communications from the Parties
1.3.
The written statements and any other communications shall be sent by the Party(-ies) to the Arbitral Tribunal, the ICC
Secretariat and the other Party(-ies) to the extent possible by e-mail. The Statement of Claim, Statement of Defense,
Claimant’s Reply, Respondents’ Rejoinder and eventual Post-Hearing Submissions and Submissions on Costs shall be sent
in hard copy as well as by e-mail. Attachments shall be provided both as print-outs and in electronic version (DVDs’ USB
flash drive or file transfer containing all attachments in PDF searchable format).
1.4.
Electronic copies of the Parties’ written statements shall be sent in PDF searchable format. They should include all
attachments.
1.5.
Each Party shall send its written statements and any other communications simultaneously to the other Party(-ies), the
Arbitral Tribunal and the ICC Secretariat in accordance with para.6 of the ICC Note to the Parties and Arbitral Tribunals
on the Conduct of ICC Arbitration and using the e-mail addresses as provided in Section 1.1. above.

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
C. Procedural Orders and Other Communications by the Arbitral Tribunal
1.6.
Any communications from the Arbitral Tribunal shall be sent to the Parties by e-mail. It shall be copied to the ICC
Secretariat.
2. Interlocutory Applications from the Parties
2.1.
All interlocutory applications shall be made in writing. In addition:
 
a)Requests for the fixing of time limits or for extensions of time shall be determined by the President of the Tribunal
alone, after such consultation with the other members of the Arbitral Tribunal and, if, the President considers it
appropriate, after consultation with the Parties.
 
b)Interlocutory applications other than requests for the fixing of time limits or for extensions of time will be determined
by the Arbitral Tribunal. It shall be within the discretion of the Arbitral Tribunal to hold a hearing prior to the
determination of such interlocutory applications.
 
c)All procedural orders to be issued by the Arbitral Tribunal may be signed by the President alone, on behalf of the
Arbitral Tribunal.
3. Written Statements
3.1.
If the Parties are directed to file written submissions, they shall provide memorials setting out a statement of their respective
case including a statement of the relief sought, a presentation of the factual and contractual and/or legal bases for each
claim, defense, and counterclaim, as well as the evidence relied upon (including witness and expert evidence).
3.2.
Each submission will have the following format:
 
a)it shall contain a table of contents;
 
b)it shall contain a separate section setting forth the pertinent contract and legal positions;
 
c)titles and subtitles shall be inserted to delineate sections, and/or topics whenever appropriate;
 
d)pages shall be numbered;
 
e)paragraphs shall be numbered in the left-hand side margin in a sequential and uninterrupted manner throughout the
submission, with at least a few paragraphs for each page to permit easy identification of the main points.

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
3.3.
Each Party shall attach the documentary evidence in support of the allegations set out in each written statement by way
of exhibits (See section 4 below).
3.4.
Each Party shall attach legal authorities (such as judgments, decisions, commentaries, articles etc.) in support of its legal
position (See section 4 below).
4. Procedural Timetables and Compliance with
Time Limits
4.1.
Submissions shall be filed in accordance with the procedural timetable attached as Exhibit A hereto as such procedural
timetable may be modified by the Arbitral Tribunal in consultation with the Parties (the “Procedural Timetable”).
4.2.
Each submission or communication shall be deemed to have been timely filed provided it was sent by e-mail, along with
any expert reports and witness statements to which it refers, on the day on which the time limit expires. Filing of hard
copies and exhibits may occur on the next business day following filing by e-mail
4.3.
Should a Party object that the other has failed to comply with a time limit, and should such other Party be unable to prove
compliance or to provide an appropriate explanation for its non-compliance, the Arbitral Tribunal shall deal with such
objection and decide in its unfettered discretion.
4.4.
Time limits may be extended by the Arbitral Tribunal.
4.5.
All requests for an extension of any time limit are to be filed as soon as possible depending on the circumstances (and in
any event prior to the date that is to be extended) and to contain the reasons relied upon, unless the extension has been
agreed upon between the Parties.
4.6.

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
If a time limit is to be extended, the Party seeking an extension shall contact and seek agreement with the other Party on
the new time limit, as well as any other time limits which may have to be postponed in case the extension is granted. In
case the extension (and/or further amendment of Procedural Timetable) requires the change of dates relating to activities to
be performed by the Arbitral Tribunal, the Parties shall seek the Arbitral Tribunal’s approval of the extensions suggested
for such dates.
4.7.
Compliance with the time limits shall be assessed in accordance with London time.
5. Documentary Evidence and Legal Authorities
5.1.
Each document produced in the arbitration shall be mentioned in the submission immediately after each fact alleged, which
such document is intended to prove, in the form of a footnote or referred to otherwise specifying name of the document
and respective paragraph and/or page of such document.
5.2.
The Arbitral Tribunal may disregard documentary evidence which is not referred to in the Parties’ submissions or discussed
therein. This provision shall apply to witness evidence and expert witness evidence mutatis mutandis.
5.3.
This section applies only to documents filed by either Party; the Arbitral Tribunal may order the production of documents
at any time, provided that reasonable notice is given to the Parties requested to produce one or several documents.
5.4.
The mention of each document will set out the nature of the document, the date of the document, the author of the document
and the recipient of the document and/or other details necessary to identify such document.
5.5.
Exhibits filed by the Claimant shall be referred to in the submissions by the abbreviation “C-”, followed by the exhibit
number in consecutive order (Ex: C-1, C-2, C-3, etc.). Legal authorities filed by the Claimant shall be referred to in the
submission by the abbreviation “CLA-“ followed by authorities number in consecutive order (Ex: CLA-1, CLA-2, CLA-3,
etc.).
5.6.
Exhibits filed by the Respondents shall be referred to in the submissions by the abbreviation “R”, followed by the exhibit
number in consecutive order (Ex: R-1, R-2, R-3, etc.). Legal authorities filed by the Respondents shall be referred to in

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
the submission by the abbreviation “RLA-“ followed by authorities number in consecutive order (Ex: RLA-1, RLA-2,
RLA-3, etc.).
5.7.
Each time documents are filed in this arbitration, an index setting out the documents filed shall be filed together with the
documents.
5.8.
If a Party files several submissions, the numbering of the exhibits and authorities filed will continue sequentially, and will
not start again from 1 onwards; no separate pagination numbers (bates) shall be required.
5.9.
Each reference number shall refer to one document and only one document.
5.10.
As an exception to paragraph 5.9, whenever it is expedient to keep several documents together (for instance a series of
invoices), the reference number used will clearly identify each and every document of the series (e.g. C-2.1, C-2.2, C-2.3,
etc.).
5.11.
The Arbitral Tribunal may order the re-filing of submissions and exhibits which were not filed in accordance with the
format required by the present Procedural Order.
5.12.
Exhibits shall be filed in a timely fashion, in accordance with the dates set out in the Procedural Timetable.
5.13.
After the cut-off date set out in the Procedural Timetable, no further documentary evidence may be filed by either Party.
5.14.
Each Party may use demonstrative exhibits at the Main Hearing, such as charts, tabulations etc., provided, however, that
such demonstrative exhibits refer to exhibits already on the record and legal arguments already made by the Parties. No
fresh evidence shall be admissible in demonstrative exhibits. Such demonstrative exhibits shall be provided to the Arbitral
Tribunal and the opposing Party at least 48 hours before planned to be used.
5.15.
Documents may be given in photocopies. Electronic correspondence (e-mails, text) shall be printed without any changes.

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
5.16.
The Arbitral Tribunal may nevertheless request the filing of an original document (or a copy certified by a notary) upon
a request by either Party or of its own motion.
5.17.
Documents submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal in any language other than English shall be accompanied by a translation
into English of the relevant parts on which a Party relies. When a Party submits a partial translation into English, the
opposing Party may request that a more extensive translation or a full translation be provided. The Parties will make good
faith efforts to agree on the extent of the needed translation, and any unresolved question will be submitted to the Arbitral
Tribunal for resolution. Translations made by the Party for the purposes of the arbitration shall set out, whenever possible,
the translator’s name and address. No notarization or other certification of the translator’s signature is required.
5.18.
The Parties shall seek to reach agreement on the accuracy of translations. When a translation remains disputed despite
the Parties’ efforts to reach agreement, the Arbitral Tribunal may require that the disputed translation be reviewed by an
independent translator or a translator appointed by the Arbitral Tribunal itself.
6. Production of Documents
6.1.
When documents or other evidence are said by any Party to be in the possession or custody or under the control of the
other and are said by any Party to be relevant to prove a fact in dispute and material to the outcome of the case so that they
should be produced by the other, the following provisions shall apply.
6.2.
This section applies only to Requests for Production of Documents made by any Party. The Arbitral Tribunal may order
the Production of Documents at any time, provided, however, that reasonable notice is given to the Party requested to
produce such documents.
6.3.
Any Party shall first seek Production of Documents from the other without copying the Arbitral Tribunal.
6.4.
In case the Parties are unable to resolve the matter between themselves within the time limit (if any) provided in
the Procedural Timetable, the requesting Party may request the Arbitral Tribunal to order production (“Request for
Production”).

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
6.5.
A Request for Production shall contain the following:
 
a)a description of the document, the production of which is requested, sufficient to identify such document, or
the description in sufficient detail, including the subject-matter, of a reasonably narrow and specific category of
documents;
 
b)an explanation of the reasons why such documents are relevant to the case and material to its outcome;
 
c)a statement whereby the documents are not in the possession, custody or control of the requesting Party; and the
reasons why such Party assumes that such documents or objects are in the possession or custody or under the control
of the other Party.
6.6.
The Party to whom the Request for Production is addressed shall file an Answer to such Request within the time limit
set out in the Procedural Timetable. Such Answer shall in particular contain that Party’s objections to the Request for
Production or, to the extent no objections are raised, the documents requested by the other Party.
6.7.
The Parties’ Requests for Production shall be presented to the Arbitral Tribunal as Redfern Schedules.
6.8.
The Arbitral Tribunal shall be guided by the IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration (2010) but
shall not be bound to apply these rules.
6.9.
When the relevance of a document can be determined only upon a perusal of the document itself, the Arbitral Tribunal
shall consult the Parties before deciding how to proceed.
6.10.
The parties are to take all reasonable steps to retain and preserve any documents (whether hard copy and/or electronic
documents in any format, whether currently in existence or which come into existence in the future) which are or may be
reasonably anticipated to be of relevance to any issues in the arbitration.
7. Witness Evidence

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
A. Witnesses
7.1.
If a Party wishes to adduce witness evidence, the witnesses’ testimony shall be set out in the written statements filed in
accordance with the Procedural Timetable.
7.2.
This section applies only to witnesses called by either Party; the Arbitral Tribunal may order the appearance of a witness
at any time, subject to reasonable notice.
7.3.
Any person may present evidence as a witness, including a Party or a Party’s officer, employee or other representative.
7.4.
It shall not be improper for a Party, its officers, employees, legal advisors or other representatives to interview its witnesses
or potential witnesses, draft witness statements, meet witnesses prior to the Main Hearing, provided, however, that the
effect of such interviews, drafting ad meetings is not the exercise of undue influence on the prospective witness.
B. Witness Statements
7.5.
Each Party shall file written Witness Statements for each of the witnesses called.
7.6.
Witness Statements shall be filed in accordance with the Procedural Timetable. The parties may interact with the witnesses
with respect to preparation of their witness statements and their testimony.
7.7.
Each Witness Statement shall contain:
 
a)the name and address (whether private or professional) of the witness;
 
b)indications as to the past and current relationship of the witness with any one of the Parties (in particular whether
the witness is or was an employee or other representative of a Party or a consultant to such Party);
 
c)a description of the background, qualifications, training, professional experience and present position of the witness,
provided that such description is relevant to the dispute or to the contents of the statement;
 
d)indications as to whether the witness is regarded as a witness of fact or an expert witness by the Party calling such
witness;
 
e)a reasonably full description of the facts/expert knowledge, and the source of the witness’ information as to those
facts;
 
f)the signature of the witness as well as the date and place of signature;
 
g)the indication of the translator’s name and address, if applicable.

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
7.8.
Witness Statements may be drafted in a language other than English. In such a case, the Witness Statement shall be filed
together with a translation into English.
7.9.
When the circumstances so require, a reasonably limited number of documents may be attached to a Witness Statement.
Such documents shall be part of the record and their presentation and indexing shall comply with para.5.4 et seq. above. If
such documents have already been filed in the arbitration and a Party wishes to attach them to a Witness Statement, they
are to be filed with their original exhibit number.
C. Oral Witness Testimony
7.10.
Each Party shall file a notice of cross-examination; such notice of cross-examination shall contain a list of the witnesses
that Party wishes to cross-examine at the Main Hearing.
7.11.
Each Party shall be in charge of ensuring that each witness whose presence is required will appear at the right time and
place to be examined at the Main Hearing.
7.12.
The Arbitral Tribunal will not in principle summon any witnesses to appear. However, the Arbitral Tribunal may, upon
request of either Party, confirm to a witness called by such Party that the Main Hearing will take place, or invite a witness
to appear when the requesting Party satisfies the Arbitral Tribunal that a particular witness is unlikely to appear without
such a confirmation or invitation.
7.13.
If a witness who was requested to appear fails to appear at the Main Hearing, the Witness Statement filed on behalf of
such witness shall in principle be disregarded by the Arbitral Tribunal, unless the Parties have agreed otherwise or, in
exceptional circumstances, if the Arbitral Tribunal has determined otherwise after hearing the Parties.
7.14.
When a Party does not intend to cross-examine a witness, the Arbitral Tribunal shall freely assess the witness statement
signed by that witness who shall not be required to appear at the Main Hearing, unless the either the Party proffering the
witness requests that the witness attend or the Arbitral Tribunal expressly requests her/his presence at the Main Hearing
to testify.
7.15.
Each witness will be invited to confirm his or her statement at the Main Hearing.
7.16.
Witnesses shall in principle be examined separately, in the order determined by the Party calling the witness.

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
7.17.
Witnesses may give oral evidence in the language of their choice, provided that arrangements for consecutive or
simultaneous interpretation to the satisfaction of the Arbitral Tribunal are made by the Party calling the witnesses in
question, initially at its own cost. Such costs of interpretation form part of the costs of the arbitration.
7.18.
Each Party shall advance the costs to be incurred in relation to the evidence of its own witnesses, without prejudice to the
decision of the Arbitral Tribunal as to which Party shall ultimately bear those costs.
8. Expert Witnesses
8.1.
Each Party shall have an opportunity to file reports or statements by expert witnesses of its own choice. The provisions on
Witness Evidence shall apply mutatis mutandis (See section 7 above).
8.2.
Each Party shall maintain a record of the documents and other evidence made available to its expert witnesses; the expert
witnesses and the party shall have joint responsibility to prepare a list of the documents consulted by the expert. Such list
shall be attached to the expert report. If any of such documents are attached to the expert report, the provisions in section
5.4 et seq. above shall apply mutatis mutandis.
8.3.
If the Arbitral Tribunal is of the opinion that a tribunal-appointed expert is required, such matter will first be raised with
the Parties. If the Arbitral Tribunal decides to appoint an expert after hearing the Parties, a Procedural Order relating to
the determination sought from the expert would be submitted to the Parties in draft form before the expert is appointed.
8.4.
If any Party seeks the appointment of a tribunal-appointed expert, a request shall be filed setting out the reasons for which
such an appointment is required and the points to be determined by the tribunal-appointed expert; the request party shall
also explain the reasons for which the expert evidence obtained from the party-appointed experts is insufficient or the
reasons for which no such party-appointed experts were retained.
9. Main Hearing
9.1.

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
The Main Hearing, if required by a Party or the Tribunal, will be preceded by a Procedural Hearing by Telephone between
the Parties and the Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with the Procedural Timetable, in which procedural and housekeeping
matters relating to the conduct of the Main Hearing will be discussed.
9.2.
Each Party shall provide the Arbitral Tribunal with a comprehensive attendance list of the persons scheduled to attend
the Main Hearing on its behalf. Such list will be sent to the Arbitral Tribunal and the other Party in accordance with the
Procedural Timetable.
9.3.
The procedure for the examination of the witnesses shall in principle be as follows:
 
a)each witness giving evidence shall be first briefly examined by Counsel acting for the Party which called such
witness (“direct examination”); in principle, no leading questions shall be permissible in direct examination;
 
b)then each witness shall be examined by Counsel acting for the Party which did not call such witness (“cross-
examination”); in principle, leading question shall be permissible in cross-examination;
 
c)the re-direct examination shall be limited to issues arising in cross-examination or as a consequence of the evidence
given by other witnesses; in principle, no leading questions shall be permissible in re-direct examination;
 
d)Counsel acting for the Party which did not call the witness shall then be permitted to conduct a brief re-cross
examination limited to issues arisen in the course of the re-direct examination; in principle, leading questions shall
be permissible in re-cross examination;
 
e)the Arbitral Tribunal shall always have the right to interject questions at any time during the witness examination;
 
f)the Arbitral Tribunal shall also at all times have complete control over the procedure in relation to a witness giving
oral evidence, including the right to limit or deny, of its own motion or at the request of either Party, the right of a
Party to cross-examine or re-examine a witness when it considers that the factual allegation(s) on which the witness
is to be heard is (are) sufficiently proven by exhibits or other witness evidence or that such examination or evidence is
unlikely to serve any further relevant purpose. The Arbitral Tribunal may also wish to organize witness conferencing
of factual or expert witnesses.
9.4.
The Parties will confer and exchange lists giving notice of the order in which witnesses are called. Generally speaking
the Main Hearing time shall be allocated evenly between the parties in a chess-clock type of approach. The parties shall
propose appropriate specific rules for the conduct of the Main Hearing in this regard at the appropriate time. Any disputes
in regard to same shall be resolved by the Arbitral Tribunal.
9.5.
No witness of fact shall be present in the hearing room during the examination of another witness of fact, provided however
that witnesses that have already testified at the Main Hearing and have been released by the Arbitral Tribunal may stay and
witness other testimony. A Party representative that is also a witness of fact may be present in the hearing room throughout
the proceeding provided, however, any such party representative shall be the first witness called by such party.

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
9.6.
The Main Hearing shall be transcribed by court reporters who will invoice the Parties directly. Each Party shall bear half
of the costs of court reporting. Likewise, any translation services that may be required during the Main Hearing will be
invoiced to the Party which called the witness or expert witness requiring interpretation.
9.7.
Unless the Parties and the Arbitral Tribunal agree otherwise during the Procedural Hearing by Telephone as provided for
in item 9.1 above, the following provisions will be applicable:
 
a)The hearing room and the respective breakout rooms shall be located in an internationally recognized hotel or a
business centre in London, UK. The hearing room and the respective breakout rooms shall be booked for the entire
business day (i.e. from 9 a.m. till 6 p.m.).
 
b)The costs for booking a hearing room and breakout rooms shall be borne by the Claimant and the Respondents in
equal shares; this however does not prevent any of the parties to pay the costs itself (without prejudice for further
distribution of the costs in the arbitral award).
 
c)The Parties shall book and pay for the hearing room and respective breakout rooms at least two months before the
scheduled hearing date.
10. Post-hearing Procedure
10.1.
In accordance with the Procedural Timetable, the Post-Hearing Procedure shall be determined by the Arbitral Tribunal in
consultation with the Parties either at the Procedural Hearing by Telephone or at the Main Hearing.
10.2.
The Arbitral Tribunal and the Parties will discuss, among other things, whether there will be submissions on issues
identified by the Arbitral Tribunal and whether there will be Submissions on Costs. The Arbitral Tribunal will set the time
limit for such submissions, if any, in consultation with the Parties.
10.3.
If there are Submissions on Costs, the arbitration proceedings shall be deemed to have been closed upon the filing of the
Parties’ Submissions on Costs unless the Arbitral Tribunal directs otherwise.

Document 8: Model Procedural Order No.1 (Special..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
11. Changes
11.1.
The Arbitral Tribunal reserves the right to modify the provisions of this Procedural Order No.1 in accordance with the
ICC Rules effective April 1, 2017, and applicable law.
* * *
Place of Arbitration: London, England, UK.
On behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal
_____________________________
President of the Arbitral Tribunal
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
