Section D. - At the End of the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638647 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section D. - At the End of the Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 7 - Role of National Courts During the Proceedings
Section D. - At the End of the Arbitration
7. 68
One final aspect of the relationship between national courts and arbitral tribunals remains to be considered: the extent to which,
if at all, national courts should exercise judicial control over the conduct of international arbitrations and the resulting award.
There are two extreme positions. As one English judge recognised:
It can be said on the one side that if parties agree to resolve their disputes through the use of a private rather than a
public tribunal, then the court system should play no part at all, save perhaps to enforce awards in the same way as
they enforce any other rights and obligations to which the parties have agreed. To do otherwise is unwarrantably
to interfere with the parties’ right to conduct their affairs as they choose.
The other extreme position reaches a very different conclusion. Arbitration has this in common with the court
system; both are a form of dispute resolution which depends on the decision of a third party. Justice dictates that
certain rules should apply to dispute resolution of this kind. Since the state is in overall charge of justice, and
since justice is an integral part of any civilised democratic society, the courts should not hesitate to intervene as
and when necessary, so as to ensure that justice is done in private as well as public tribunals. 99
The extent to which there should be judicial control at the seat of the arbitration and at the place of enforcement over both the
conduct of the arbitration and the resulting award is a matter on which different commentators and, more importantly, different
states have taken different views. It is an important matter and is considered in more detail in Chapters 10 and 11.
Footnotes
99
Saville, ‘The Denning Lecture 1995: Arbitration and the courts’ (1995) 61 Arbitration 157, at 157.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
