Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution Strategies
After a Dispute Arises
A Practical Guide to Effective Dispute Resolution: Methods & Clauses 1st Ed.
Mainwork
Part 3 - Managing Disputes Effectively: Strategic Insights and Technological Advances
Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution Strategies After a Dispute Arises
Introduction
8-001
After a dispute arises, the parties can be tempted to exacerbate the issue, and their relationship, by referring the case to dispute
resolution lawyers and pursuing binding dispute resolution methods as soon as contractually possible. A natural reaction to
what may be seen as an aggressive act is to push back equally strongly and, as a result, this approach does not normally lead
to the dispute being resolved quickly or in the most cost-effective way.
Generally, a litigious approach is likely to lead to escalation of the dispute, with significant costs being consumed by the process
as a result of lengthy and time-consuming litigation or arbitration processes being followed, with subsequent enforcement being
pursued, not necessarily within one jurisdiction. Although the winning party may get something out of this process, it may still
lose on costs and the result may only be achieved in a much longer timeframe with business resources being tied up during the
process. Another significant downside is that this process is likely to result in the business relationship being destroyed beyond
repair, with any future business opportunities being lost.
Acknowledging that it can involve a difficult cultural shift in an organisation, a more strategic approach from both sides would
be to adopt a long-term perspective on emerging disputes and prioritise alternative dispute resolution (ADR) methods over
immediate litigation or arbitration. By conducting a thorough dispute analysis and selecting the most appropriate resolution
technique, or techniques, to employ, parties can save costs and time, ultimately leading to more effective and satisfactory
outcomes.
The parties should consider utilising multiple non-court-based dispute resolution techniques either consecutively or in tandem
and to ensure that those techniques best suit the nature of the dispute, the timing of the intervention and the relationship between
the parties.
Dispute analysis and an outcome-focused approach
8-002
The first thing to determine is whether there is a pre-existing dispute resolution clause or agreement in the contract. If there
is, then one needs to consider whether the procedure prescribed is suitable to deal with the dispute in question. If there is no
dispute resolution clause, or the clause only provides for court jurisdiction without considering any other methods, it is important
to consider whether the best option to achieve the designed outcome really is litigation without attempting any other dispute
resolution method.
Although it is unlikely that immediately resorting to litigation would be optimal in most situations, there are some important
exceptions. These include where interim measures, like a freezing order over assets that can be dissipated, are required; serious
allegations of fraud, which are unlikely to be resolved by a non-binding method of dispute resolution; and scenarios where the
other side is not willing to communicate. There are also some circumstances, for example, where the limitation period is about to
expire, where the prompt commencement of proceedings is important for reasons that are not related to the dispute or the parties.

Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
In summary, it is important to analyse the dispute and consider the dispute resolution strategy including all of the techniques
available from direct negotiations and dialogue through to third-party determination. Another way of looking at this is to make
ADR the default position unless clear reasons exist that exclude ADR.
Often mediation occurs too late in the life of a dispute. By the time the parties mediate, they have become too focused on their
legal rights and are increasingly polarised. By focusing on rights-based arguments and the adversarial legal process (pleadings,
discovery, briefs, etc.), little or no time is given to identifying and exploring underlying needs and interests.
When considering a dispute resolution strategy, it is important to take an outcome-focused approach. A party needs to consider
what they want to achieve from the dispute resolution process and what outcome would be acceptable to them. This means
focusing their mind on the interests involved, rather than their legal rights. 1
Adopting a mediation-mindset from the start, including considering options to compromise, can help parties see a dispute in a
different way and, in so doing, to follow a more collaborative approach. Choosing this, rather than immediately opting for an
adversarial approach, means that an outcome-focused approach shifts the focus from merely winning the case and defeating the
other side, to achieving solutions that align with both parties’ goals and ultimately preserve good will and relationship between
the parties.
It is important for the parties to consider not only what their own interests and desired outcome is but also what outcome the
other side may want and what their interests are. In this analysis, putting a mediator’s hat on may help the party to understand
the nature of the dispute better, where the other side is coming from and what the range of solutions could be.
To prepare for mediation, or other non-binding dispute resolution processes, parties need to carefully consider the needs and
interests of the other side, or sides. If this is not done, it is unlikely they will be able to come up with creative solutions, because
they will only focus on their own argument and their own interests. For example, when parties know what each other’s interests
are, they can sort them into three types: shared, different or conflicting. Shared interests help parties to cooperate (just like shared
values do). Different interests over the same issue, or asset, create opportunities for creative exchanges and value creation.
Conflicting interests need to be resolved.
If the parties do not prepare well and think about each other’s positions, interests and needs, the dispute resolution process is
less likely to succeed, and the range of possible solutions will be restricted as a result of each party only suggesting options
that favour their own position.
Why do parties not always engage in ADR?
Introduction
8-003
The benefits of this approach may seem obvious but, as it does not happen as much as it should, it is worth exploring the
reasons why ADR may not be adopted. Understanding these reasons requires examining factors related to emotions, legal
culture, strategic considerations and information asymmetry.
Emotion
8-004
One of the most common factors is the emotion that can develop if a material dispute arises after a long-term relationship.
These emotions, including frustration, perceived violations of trust and a sense of justice/being wronged can quickly lead to
parties becoming less willing to compromise and more focused on seeking “just” outcomes through formal legal proceedings.
Once steps are taken down this path, a compounding factor can be the approach taken by legal advisers if they are also of
a litigation mindset.

Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
The dispute itself can also damage the trust that was previously present in the relationship. If trust fails, the willingness to
work collaboratively toward mutually agreeable solutions also often declines. When trust fails in the dispute (as it often does),
it can be replaced by a detailed, step-by-step settlement agreement that spells out in precise detail what each party is to do and
when. These detailed milestones can be used in the place of trust. With time, provided the parties see each other as meeting
the milestones, a degree of trust may be re-established.
Depending on the nature of the dispute, if there have been other, more subtle, negative changes in the relationship over time,
especially if there has been a change in the personnel involved, a party might also perceive the dispute as a form of straw/
trigger that prompts a sense of requiring vindication via a formal court or arbitration judgment rather than a swift, practical
resolution.
A potentially significant problem is that once a party sets out and communicates their view of their legal position and takes
a particular stance, entrenchment can quickly set in, so that it becomes difficult for a party to change their position without
losing face.
Legal and strategic motivation
8-005
In some cases, a party could have encountered similar disputes in other contractual relationships and have determined that
it would help to establish a legal precedent. In this context, the benefit of the confidentiality offered by resolving disputes
through ADR can actually be seen by that party as a negative in that, whilst ADR prioritises amicable outcomes, it does not
tend to create any legal precedent.
Similarly, if a party has been successful in previous litigation relating to a similar issue, the resulting confidence in the strength
of their legal position might make them less inclined to settle by ADR which would inevitably require them to compromise.
If either of the parties have no experience of ADR, then uncertainty about the process can nudge them towards seeking advice
from their normal legal advisors (both in-house and external) and cause them to take the first step on the path to litigation
in the belief that the outcome will be more certain and/or enforceable.
Perceived power imbalance
8-006
It is not uncommon for the larger party, who may have deeper pockets, an in-house litigation team or a litigation culture, to
have a reduced sense of the benefits of ADR as they believe that will get a more favourable outcome by forcing the process
into litigation or arbitration. Larger parties can also have a lower perception of the risk and consequence of losing.
A party might also fear that suggesting ADR will signal weakness or give the other party a sense that they have a weak case
and are unwilling to pursue legal action or defend their position. This fear of perceived weakness can encourage aggressive
posturing rather than collaborative problem-solving.
An apparent reluctance to participate in ADR can be a mix of all of these factors and it can be a mistake to make assumptions
that the reason is x, y or z. Instead, the best option for a party who is prepared to explore the benefits of ADR is to make a
proposal and, if this is rejected outright, to push for reasons. If the dispute still ends up going to a binding stage, this list can
still be helpful if the issue of the absence of ADR is raised in court.
Parties should not forget to include the above considerations in their dispute analysis matrix and to remind themselves that
parties who are driven by an emotional need to have their day in court often get what they perceive to be an unfair outcome by
virtue of losing the case or even if winning the case, do so after spending a lot of time and cost (the classic Pyrrhic victory).
It cannot be overemphasised that, instead of being carried away by emotions and ending up in court, it is worth recognising
this emotional response from the start and proactively building this into the dispute resolution strategy. The bottom-line is

Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
that there are other methods of dispute resolution than litigation, in particular mediation, which are much better suited for
dealing with parties’ emotions and relationship.
Either way, it is important to balance legal and interpersonal or inter-party considerations, recognising not only the legal and
factual aspects of the dispute, but also the relationship dynamics. After all, if the parties had a business relationship before
the dispute, this may be more important to preserve rather than have it permanently destroyed in court. That is why, focusing
on the outcome at the start and adopting a more strategic mindset to the resolution of the dispute is more important than
following a formalistic approach to what precisely is written in the contract or what the law says on this.
How to choose the most effective method to resolve a particular dispute
and hybrid alternatives
8-007
In the event that a dispute arises in the absence of an agreed dispute resolution clause, the parties still have an opportunity to
try and resolve the dispute using individual or hybrid non-binding methods. However, as there is no express dispute resolution
clause, attempts to resolve the dispute have to be made under the cloud of what is likely to happen if one or other of the parties
decide not to engage.
A second factor is that, as there is no obligation to participate in ADR, this can tend to polarise the positions of the parties and
make ADR more difficult. In circumstances where either party feels they have a strong legal case or, indeed, a heightened sense
of injustice, this can push them towards litigation even if only to have their day in court.
Whilst there may be psychological barriers, one of the important considerations in the dispute resolution strategy is which
method or methods to choose to attempt to resolve the dispute. In the absence of a dispute resolution clause in the existing
contract, there will be no automatic escalation clause and it is important for both parties to give sufficient thought to methods
that can be attempted to resolve the dispute.
Broadly speaking, the parties could firstly attempt to resolve the dispute without the assistance of a third-party neutral. This
is likely to be through direct negotiation. However, if negotiation is attempted first without adopting a more cooperative and
open stance, one party, or both, may start negotiations with an adversarial tone or have a power struggle. This situation may
quickly lead to the end of any attempts to settle by consent and the matter would move to litigation, or arbitration if agreed,
where parties are likely to continue their battle using all available means, incurring a lot of cost and time.
An effective strategy for this kind of situation could be to involve a neutral third-party early in the dispute resolution process,
who can help the parties develop a more collaborative mindset and try to find a way to resolve the dispute without using binding
methods. Some litigation teams who have experience with, and appreciate the advantages of, non-binding dispute resolution
options will now select a neutral mediator as soon as they get instructions. That mediator can then help the parties not only
with settlement, but also with the procedural steps in either litigation or arbitration. This can help the parties to communicate
in a more cooperative way on matters such as disclosure, evidence and issues. This technique gets the parties more accustomed
to negotiating through a neutral third-party at an earlier stage, which can, and often does, speed up settlement discussions and
increase the chances of a mutual resolution to the dispute.
Mediation
8-008
Mediation is an obvious choice for a process to be attempted first and is actively encouraged by the court system. A more
detailed review is given in Chapter Three of this book. Considering its application post-dispute in the absence of a mandatory
clause, a key benefit is the possibility of developing a more cooperative and open-minded tone to communications between the
parties and to focus their attention on their long-term interests, rather than their opening positions. If successful, this will divert
the parties away from a more legalistic approach and encourage them to think about solutions, rather than problems.

Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Even if the mediation process itself does not lead to a binding settlement between the parties, it is very common for parties to
continue their discussions post-mediation with a more cooperative tone. If the mediation has been done effectively, even if it
does not result in a full resolution of the dispute, the issues may have crystallised, and the parties’ interests may have become
clearer. The hope is that the mediator would have helped the parties change their respective positions and to start viewing the
dispute through a more cooperative lens, taking into account the other party or parties’ needs and interests.
The outcomes of mediation are therefore more nuanced than simply thinking of it in a binary sense: success or failure.
Traditionally mediation was viewed as “successful” if it ended in the resolution of all matters. That focus is limiting and ignores
the other significant benefits of mediation, including more collaborative dialogue, refining of issues, settlement of some issues,
establishing a consensual framework to address matters, such as expert evidence, preservation of relationships, etc. Even if
some aspects of the dispute need to be determined by a third party, the use of mediation throughout the dispute (once or on a
number of occasions) can still lead to significant time, cost and relationship savings. Mediation even has its benefits post-receipt
of the award or judgment, where payment issues may need to be negotiated. Even here there are opportunities to improve the
relationship between the parties.
Early neutral evaluation
8-009
If either mediation or negotiation does not lead to a settlement, it can be beneficial to add non-binding early neutral evaluation
(ENE) into the mix. Having a dispute evaluated by an authoritative neutral party can often help provide the parties with a reality
check of their positions and, in so doing, speed up the process of finding a solution that both parties may be able to settle upon.
In this context, ENE should be considered to be an enabler that allows the parties to come back to the negotiation table equipped
with an improved understanding of their own and the other party’s case and facilitate further attempts to reach a settlement.
More detail about ENE is provided in Chapter Four.
As an aside, if an ENE is strongly in one parties’ favour, it should be noted that there is always a chance that it may actually
encourage a party to become more entrenched and happier to go to court as they will believe even more that they will win.
Assuming that the ENE evaluation is well-founded, this effect should also be seen as positive in that it should encourage a
weaker party to settle for less (or conversely to pay more if they are the defendant/respondent) than they originally aspired to,
whilst still delivering the benefit of reducing the potential costs of litigation and any costs award that might follow.
It is worthwhile considering all possible options before moving to a binding dispute resolution process. This is especially true
if the remaining option involves litigation. This is because the parties are likely to spend much more time and costs on arguing
issues in court, rather than paying for a neutral party to help them to resolve their dispute.
The other factor is that, depending on the nature of the business and the relationship, it may ultimately cost more for the parties
to lose the business with each other. It is important to realise that if it is decided to take the dispute to court, such a fight is
likely to fracture the business relationship beyond repair.
Hybrid options
8-010
Given the flexibility that non-binding dispute resolution methods bring, it is both possible and, in fact, encouraged, to mix and
match them during the dispute resolution process. The selection of the process (or processes) should be considered from the
perspective of the outcome, not what the party, or more often their advisers, typically do. The non-binding dispute resolution
techniques to be employed should be based upon the nature of the dispute, including all other relevant matters such as the
relationship between the parties. It is recognised that settlement through a non-binding route will always require parties to
compromise in one sense or another. In this way, the development of a dispute resolution strategy can incorporate various
methods and ways to achieve the ultimate goal, namely a cost-effective resolution that maintains the relationship.

Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
A flexible hybrid dispute resolution strategy can include an iterative combination of mediation, cooperative negotiation, ENE
and, if necessary, arbitration. At each stage of such a dispute resolution process, it is more likely that the issues between the
parties will crystallise, and either be resolved or narrowed down to the point of reducing the time that a final selected binding
dispute resolution process could take.
To be truly flexible, these hybrid options should, where necessary, include a determinative step. Typically, this is arbitration.
For example, the parties may make significant progress with a dispute during direct negotiations or mediation but get stuck on a
technical issue or point of interpretation. That issue could then be taken to FastTrack arbitration for determination. 2  Following
the award on that matter, the parties can continue with the mediation armed with a binding answer on that particular point (or
points). This blended approach (often referred to as Med-Arb or Med-Arb-Med) can be used throughout the life of the dispute
and each component of the process (mediation or arbitration) can be employed several times in order to move the parties towards
the final resolution on all matters in dispute.
In turn, this can save the parties costs and time on reaching a final resolution when compared to the default alternative of a
binding method.
How to choose between binding methods of dispute resolution and what
form they could take?
8-011
Of the binding methods of dispute resolution, court litigation is probably the least flexible and the most formal. The parties have
little choice in terms of procedure (normally, it is prescribed by the civil procedure rules of the local court) and their tribunal
(in terms of their decision to choose a particular judge). The courts may also refuse jurisdiction on the basis of local laws, or
the jurisdiction may be prescribed.
Depending on the jurisdiction in question, the parties may need to find qualified lawyers in that jurisdiction to pursue matters
further. There may be little control over the length of time the matter may be listed in front of the court and how long the
proceedings may last. As a result, the costs may become very high depending on the demands of a particular jurisdiction.
Overall, once a matter reaches court, litigation tends to offer the parties very little control over the dispute resolution process.
In contrast to litigation, arbitration offers more flexibility over the process. This is because the process is determined by the
agreement of the parties and dependent on what was pre-agreed between the parties in an arbitration agreement and whether the
parties are happy to vary that agreement. If so, the parties can select their tribunal (ensuring equality in this process), procedural
rules and what the tribunal needs to decide. They can also mutually agree on deviations from this process including, abridging
proceedings, tailoring them to the needs of the parties or a particular dispute, and setting specific time limits to speed it up.
Parties agreeing on certain time limits and abridged procedures can ask the tribunal to make a procedural order in this regard and
to follow this further in the proceedings. The arbitral tribunal may also suggest that the parties agree on those points anyway.
Parties with a cooperative and proactive approach will be able to ensure that the arbitral proceedings are conducted in the most
cost effective and time efficient manner.
In this way, if earlier non-binding stages have allowed the parties to close the gap but not fully resolve the dispute, the parties
can still use arbitral proceedings to resolve the remaining issues between them. This can avoid embarking on a very costly and
lengthy process of litigation or protracted arbitral proceedings, where the parties try to raise every point or oppose the same,
adopting a traditional adversarial approach.
Having adopted a cooperative approach from the start of the dispute resolution process through engaging in mediation or
cooperative negotiation, the parties are in a good position to resolve any remaining issues swiftly through arbitration, if the
same approach is brought to the arbitration proceedings.

Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
Arbitration on particular issues
8-012
There is also a possibility to have an arbitration on particular issues or a narrow arbitration clause. This is where parties limit
the scope of arbitral proceedings to specific unresolved issues identified during mediation or collaborative negotiations. The
provisions for a narrow scope arbitration can be agreed in advance (before a dispute arises) or after a dispute arises, even
amending the previous arbitration agreement by narrowing the issues for the arbitral tribunal to decide.
One of the advantages of narrowing the issues is that it is possible to select an arbitrator who has expertise in the specific
area relating to the issues in question. The fact that the arbitration proceedings will focus solely on the issues identified in the
arbitration agreement (agreed between the parties after the dispute has arisen) should reduce the time and costs of the arbitration
proceedings.
At the same time, parties pursuing this approach need to be careful to manage any further issues that could arise and inadvertently
further escalate costs and time. In particular, unless carefully considered, the limited scope of arbitration might result in an
incomplete resolution of the overall dispute. There may also be other interconnected issues that would not be addressed in
the arbitration award that could cause further dispute or proceedings. Having narrowed the issues for arbitration, if an award
considers additional issues and the increased scope was not agreed by the parties, this may result in challenges to the award
itself during the enforcement stage on the basis of the scope of jurisdiction of the tribunal.
Parties may be able to mitigate this risk by clearly defining and identifying the unresolved issue or issues. They may also include
the issues that were resolved in the common grounds (the areas or points agreed between the parties and presented to the tribunal
as non-contentious and not requiring any decision by the tribunal). Alternatively, they may ask the tribunal to incorporate the
agreement on those issues in the arbitration award. Either option ensures that the award has as complete a record as possible
of the issues that have arisen in the dispute and how those issues have been dealt with. Including these matters in any award
would also be of benefit for the full and final resolution of the dispute (any potential res judicata issues) and for enforcement.
There is also a possibility to provide for a narrow scope arbitration before a dispute arises, for example, at the time of the writing
of the arbitration clause. However, the risk is that this approach may later limit the parties’ choices, as well as possibly invite
further unnecessary proceedings in relation to other issues of the same dispute which, by default, may end up in litigation.
As previously discussed, arbitration agreements are typically drafted as wide as possible. This is to ensure that all matters that
are arbitrable in a given jurisdiction will be determined in arbitration and not litigation. It would therefore be unusual to see an
arbitration agreement limited to dealing with specific types of disputes or issues. However, it may be worthwhile providing for
a flexibility provision to allow for adjustments to be made to the arbitration agreement, so that the parties could later consider
how best to tailor the arbitration process to suit their needs and the dispute in question.
A flexibility provision in an arbitration agreement could also provide for alternative procedures to deal with a particular dispute
by mutual agreement. Even if this is optional and not put into a formal multi-tier escalation agreement, it can still serve to
encourage the parties to tailor the process to the specific needs and requirements of a particular dispute.
Given that a fundamental basis for arbitration is party autonomy, the parties are free to modify their arbitration agreement later
by mutual agreement or conversely to agree on how they are going to address a particular dispute, without the need to modify
the arbitration agreement. This is the case even in the absence of specific flexibility provisions. However, the advantages of
including a flexibility provision in the original agreement are that it could potentially help clarify the parties’ intentions and
expectations regarding the ability to modify the arbitration process. It could also encourage parties’ cooperation by building
flexibility into the dispute resolution process, as well as streamlining and expediting the process of making adjustments later.
Med-Arb or Arb-Med-Arb
8-013

Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
There is a possibility for the parties to engage in blended Med-Arb or Arb-Med-Arb dispute resolution processes. Med-Arb
traditionally is done by starting the process of dispute resolution with a mediator but if the mediation is unsuccessful in whole
or in part, the process will transform into an arbitration, and the original mediator may or may not take on the dual role of also
being the arbitrator. Conversely, a different neutral can be appointed to act as arbitrator. This is a point much debated globally
—whether one person can be both mediator and arbitrator in the same dispute. This process is not often applied in common law
jurisdictions but adopted in some civil law jurisdictions. For common law lawyers, it may appear controversial—particularly,
when one neutral takes on both roles. However, given the time and cost pressure on all forms of determinative dispute resolution,
blended processes are going to be used more frequently in the future.
As mentioned above, one of main controversies surrounding this process is whether a mediator and an arbitrator can be the
same person. From one side, most international arbitration rules expressly require neutrality and fairness in both arbitration and
mediation proceedings. From the other side, there is a clear difference in their role in both processes.
One of the main differences between the role of a mediator and an arbitrator is that, in mediation, the parties can give the
mediator confidential information about their positions that cannot be given to the other party without consent. It follows from
this that complications will arise if a mediator were to act as an arbitrator in the same proceedings. 3  Parties may also be reluctant
to reveal their confidential information to the mediator in case they become an arbitrator in the same dispute. The simplest way
to deal with these complications is to ensure that a different neutral or neutrals are used for the mediation and arbitration roles.
Another possibility is to consider Arb-Med-Arb. The most prominent example of this process is provided in the Arb-Med-Arb
Protocol for proceedings originally commenced in the Singapore International Arbitration Centre (SIAC), which will then be
stayed, and the case file will be transferred to the Singapore International Mediation Centre (SIMC) for mediation. In the case
that the matter is not settled by mediation, the arbitration proceedings will resume. If the matter is settled, the parties’ agreement
can form part of a consent arbitration award. The difference here is that the arbitral tribunal and a mediator are different third-
party neutrals and appointed separately, which avoids the controversy of joined Med-Arb proceedings.
Even in the absence of an Arb-Med-Arb clause or joined administration by SIAC-SIMC, the parties can still replicate the same
process in a more flexible way. Nothing prohibits them from agreeing to mediate after arbitration proceedings have already
commenced. The parties can request the arbitral tribunal to stay arbitration proceedings pending their further attempts to settle
the dispute by way of mediation. If it is mutually agreed, this is unlikely to be denied. If the parties decide to settle the proceedings
following mediation, a consent award can be made by the tribunal later that reflects this, and the parties would benefit from the
enforceability provided by virtue of the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral
Awards (1958) (New York Convention).
In this way, the parties are able to “mix and match” the dispute resolution methods and processes and tailor them to their needs
and the requirements of the dispute involved. This approach provides the most effective way to dispute resolution and the best
way to achieve the optimum outcome.
Expert determination
8-014
Where a dispute involves technical issues, it is also possible that the parties decide that the issues are best suited for expert
determination which would bring a binding resolution to those clearly identified issues. They can request an expert to determine
particular issues and settle the rest of the dispute by other methods depending on the outcome of the expert determination. It may
well be that expert determination, whilst not originally included in the dispute resolution clause, becomes the most appropriate
method to resolve particular technical issues. In this regard, by mutually agreeing to go for post-dispute expert determination
agreement, the parties may save a lot of time and costs, rather than pursuing the case elsewhere in litigation.
Expert determinations can be binding or non-binding depending on the wishes of the parties.
Thus, in order to ensure that the dispute is resolved in the most cost-effective and time efficient manner, with preservation of the
business relationship between the parties, all options need to be considered in a flexible and cooperative “outcome focussed”
approach between the parties.

Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
Blended methods of resolving disputes
8-015
The phrase “blended” dispute resolution is a dispute resolution process which combines different dispute resolution methods. For
example, as described above, starting with an initial mediation, proceeding later to collaborative negotiation and/or interjecting
ENE at some point of time in this process, offering some insight and a reality check, that can later be used for further round
of negotiations. As explained above, this process can precede a recourse to binding methods, such as arbitration, which can
also be interrupted by a further round of mediation or negotiation. This process is referred to as a blended or hybrid dispute
resolution process.
Another interpretation of “blended” dispute resolution process can also include blended methods of resolving disputes. Unlike
the process described above, such blended methods can combine in themselves various elements of dispute resolution. For
example, negotiations can have the assistance of a third-party neutral facilitator. 4  The real opportunity for parties who are not
already bound by a formalised binding hierarchy of escalation is to actively consider such blended options in their strategy
for resolving a dispute.
During this process it is important that the spirit of collaboration, effective communication, preservation of business relationships
and an interests-oriented and solution-based approach are adopted to guide their actions. 5
Given that parties may be culturally pre-conditioned to adopt a more adversarial and less cooperative approach, it can be difficult
for them to change. One element of motivation for such a change is the understanding that a dispute resolution process benefits
from flexibility and adaptability. Coupled with a neutral facilitator’s ability to encourage creative problem-solving, along with
their subject-matter expertise and experience in comparable situations, it can significantly enhance the likelihood of effective
dispute resolution.
The facilitator’s role can vary depending on the process, what the parties want, and the dispute itself. Generally, a neutral
facilitator will be involved in guiding the negotiation process and create a structured, constructive and collaborative environment
for the parties to discuss their issues and interests. As explained in Chapter Three, both facilitative and evaluative mediation
involve the facilitator helping the parties identify their underlying interests, rather than their positions. This allows them to
refine their goals and explore each parties’ perspective.
The facilitator will be able to suggest potential solutions to the identified issues, which would aim to bridge gaps, find common
ground and move the negotiation process forward. However, the facilitator will have to be careful, when suggesting solutions,
not to be perceived as imposing them or favouring one party or the other in the process.
If the facilitator loses the perception of neutrality in the eyes of one or both of the parties, the prospects for reaching agreement
rapidly diminish. 6  One reason for this is that, if a party believes a facilitator is biased, they are less likely to engage fully. This
can include limiting self-disclosure and/or being less receptive to ideas from the other side. As a result, perceived bias can fuel
distrust, causing parties to dig in their heels and making it harder to reach a settlement. It is important to understand that, even
if a facilitator is not biased, the perception of bias alone can damage the perceived legitimacy of the process and any outcomes.
Whilst brainstorming ideas, evaluating options and suggesting a number of possible solutions will be part of the process, the
parties’ autonomy in deciding on those ideas, options and solutions must still be preserved.
In the tailored, blended process, there may be iteration with ongoing feedback, evolving dynamics, and further adjustments being
made to the process. Unlike mediation, which usually takes one day, a blended process may require a number of sessions spread
over days, weeks, if not months, where the parties can exchange key information, identify issues, improve their negotiation
techniques, explore options, solutions and the remaining unresolved issues. The aim is to find a mutually acceptable resolution
to the dispute.
Although one may see this process as lengthy and costly, compared to litigation itself, this process will still take less time, be
much less resource consuming, significantly cheaper, and preserve or even improve relationships. This can lead to much more
favourable and acceptable outcomes, with the reduction of risks that litigation or traditional arbitration often entail. If there
are issues that remain unresolved, the matter could then proceed, as explained above, to the issue arbitration, where it can also
iterate between arbitration and facilitated negotiations, with the tribunal consisting of different neutral parties—arbitrators.

Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
If all participants of the process understand their roles and are guided by a focus on the outcome (resolving the dispute) rather
than following the formalities of each of the separate processes, the achieved outcome may be much more satisfactory. By
giving the parties more control over the full process, such an outcome can also preserve the parties’ relationship despite possibly
involving binding dispute resolution processes. At the end of the matter, satisfaction with the success of the process may bring
the parties more value than winning the case at the expense of legal costs and the resources and distraction of the time spent on it.
Facilitating the process of dispute resolution in the most efficient and
cost-effective way
8-016
In summary, facilitating the dispute resolution process in the most efficient and cost-effective way requires the right mindset of
the parties, their lawyers and the third party neutral, which is directed towards cooperation, open mindedness, flexibility and
a goal-oriented approach in order to find a solution to the dispute in question, rather than simply adopt an adversarial way of
dealing with disputes, which often happens, if parties end up in court.
It is sometimes put forward by parties that there is no point in attempting to resolve a dispute by any means other than litigation
or arbitration, as it is likely to be a waste of time and costs. What these parties do not always take into account is that they
were going to spend much more time and legal costs from the point of initiating legal proceedings to the point when one of
them finally succeeds in getting something out of this process (in the majority of cases the result will be a money equivalent
of what they are allowed to get in legal terms).
At the same time, on the way, they may lose their business partner, their reputation, business opportunities, time on arguing
the case and waiting for it to be heard along with the money spent on legal costs, not all of which may be recoverable. This is
assuming they are successful, and the money is paid post judgment. If there is an appeal and/or enforcement stage, they may
end up getting much less than the value of the claim, if anything at all. In addition, the losing side may get nothing and be faced
with paying not only its own legal costs, but the costs of the other side.
There is no such thing as a 100% probability of success in any litigation and, whilst there is no scientifically precise answer, the
chances of success are often much less than that. This means that, when entering into litigation proceedings, parties are running
a risk of losing a lot. The stark fact is that somebody will have to lose for the other side to win. A party who is confident and
goes to litigation is still running a risk that they are investing money and time with no guarantee of return and the potential
detriment of lost relationships at the end of it.
This risk can be mitigated by parties engaging in out-of-court dispute resolution processes from the start. Not only can it lead to
the resolution of the matter one way or the other, but there is also an opportunity to avoid the risk of litigation by not participating
in it at all. It is far better to consider other, more effective, ways to resolve the dispute.
Whist there are a great variety of existing methods of dispute resolution, a party does not need to be bound by one or the
other. They can be combined or blended in one process, and as long as it makes sense and runs reasonably cooperatively and
efficiently, it does not really matter what it is called.
Participation of a third-party neutral can ensure that the process is streamlined, and that there is someone who can look
objectively at the issues in dispute and help the parties understand better the other side’s case. It can also help develop a more
cooperative mindset for all those who are involved. Ultimately, it may help to find solutions to the problem and settle the case
more quickly than the alternative.
A binding option of resolving the dispute is always there as the default for parties who are unable to reach a settlement. However,
it is important that other options are properly considered, attempted and pursued. The law does not always have the answer and
rarely will it give everything a party wants. If a party is prepared to compromise and give up on wishful thinking, this provides
the best basis for achieving the most effective and, ultimately, more satisfactory outcome.

Chapter 8 - Choosing Effective Dispute Resolution..., UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
Footnotes
1
Paul Sills, From Litigation to Resolution and Back Again, Arbitrators & Mediators Institute of New Zealand (AMINZ)
Conference 2014.
2
Irene Welser and Christian Klausegger, “Fast Track Arbitration: Just fast or something different?” (2009) Austrian
Yearbook on international Arbitration 2009 259, 260.
3
Gao Haiyan v Keeneye Holdings Ltd [2011] HKEC 514.
4
Sills, From Litigation to Resolution and Back Again, AMINZ Conference 2014.
5
See also Paul Sills, Alternative dispute resolution needs an alternative, Australian National Mediation Conference 2016,
for more discussion on collaborative dispute resolution.
6
A.J. Lee, “Implicit Bias in Mediation: Strategies for Mediators to Engage Constructively with ‘Incoming’ Implicit
Bias” (2019–2020) 25 Harv. Negot. L. Rev. 167.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
