What constitutes proof of authority, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407052 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
What constitutes proof of authority
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
What constitutes proof of authority
17-13
In international arbitrations, there is no standard power of attorney or specific format for such power. Powers of attorney are
normally signed and will refer to the ICC arbitration, by giving the name of the parties involved therein and/or the ICC case
number. Each lawyer will typically follow the practice prevailing in the lawyer’s jurisdiction as regards the form and substance
of the power of attorney. In many jurisdictions, local bar associations provide standard forms of powers of arbitration, and
generally, they can be used as such for an ICC arbitration.
17-14
It is for each Tribunal to decide what it considers to be sufficient proof of authority for a party representative to represent one
or more parties to the arbitration, in particular as regards the scope of the power and of the authority of the company’s organ
to issue such power. It may, for instance, require proof that the signatory of the power of attorney has the corporate authority
to issue such power alone on behalf of the company. A current corporate certificate or extract from the Commercial Register
may have to be submitted as well. The Tribunal may also wish to verify whether acts undertaken before the issuance of the
power of attorney, such as the appointment of an arbitrator, require any form of confirmation or approval as a matter of the
law applicable to the issuance of such power, and if so request that the party arrange for it, or, if no such measure is required,
confirm this to the Tribunal.
17-15
The original of the power of attorney and of supporting documents is normally sent to the president of the Tribunal alone,
with electronic copies to the opposing party and the other members of the Tribunal. 23  If the opposing party has questions or
comments to make about the validity of the power of attorney, it should raise them promptly. If the Tribunal considers them to
be valid points, it will seek clarification. In some cases, the duration of the power of attorney is limited in time. The Tribunal
may therefore have to ask for a new power, or a proper extension thereof if the party representative is expected to take further
actions in the arbitration following the expiration of the power.
Footnotes
23
The presiding arbitrator may consider it sufficient to receive an electronic copy rather than the original.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
