Section D. - Written Submissions, UKBC-REDFERN 530638640 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section D. - Written Submissions
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 6 - Conduct of the Proceedings
Section D. - Written Submissions
(a) Introduction
6. 65
Following the fixing of a procedural schedule, the first step in addressing the merits of a claim will involve the exchange of
detailed written submissions.
6. 66
The LCIA Rules, for example, provide that, after the parties have delivered the Request for Arbitration and the Response, written
pleadings consisting of a ‘Statement of Case’, ‘Statement of Defence’, and ‘Statement of Reply’ (and any further equivalent
written pleadings in the event of a counterclaim, referred to in the Rules as a ‘cross-claim’) follow each other within certain
time limits. It is clear from these Rules that these written statements are to be the only pre-hearing written submissions in the
arbitration, unless otherwise ordered by the arbitral tribunal. 65
6. 67
The Swiss Rules also provide for the exchange of statements of claim and defence, which are to be accompanied by ‘all
documents and other evidence on which [a party] relies’, and states that ‘the arbitral tribunal shall decide, after consulting with
the parties, which further written statements [ … ] shall be required from the parties or may be presented by them’. 66
6. 68
The ICSID Rules refer to the documents that are to be filed by the parties as a ‘memorial’ and a ‘counter-memorial’, followed,
unless otherwise agreed by the parties, by a reply and a rejoinder. 67  The Rules provide that a memorial should contain a
statement of the relevant facts, a statement of law, and submissions, and that the counter-memorial, reply, or rejoinder should
respond to these statements and submissions, and add any additional facts, statements of law, or submissions of its own. 68  The
Explanatory Note states that the scope of these pleadings represents:
an adaptation of common law practice to the procedure of the civil law. These provisions, tested by international
arbitration practice, are designed to prevent procedural arguments concerning the scope of pleadings, even if
the parties have differing legal backgrounds. Where, however, the parties share a common experience with an
identical or similar system of procedure, they may agree on different contents and functions for the pleadings. 69
6. 69
Written pleadings are usually exchanged sequentially, so that the claimant fires the first shot, the statement of claim, and the
respondent answers with the statement of defence (and counterclaim, if any). Exceptionally, however, the arbitral tribunal may
direct that the parties should submit their written pleadings simultaneously, so that each party delivers a written submission
of its claims against the other on a set date, and then, on a subsequent date, the parties exchange their written answers and so
forth. Whilst simultaneous exchanges can reduce the overall duration of the written phase, they are more likely to lead to the
arbitral equivalent of ‘ships passing in the night’. For this reason, simultaneous exchange remains less common than sequential
exchange for pre-hearing submissions. 70
6. 70

Section D. - Written Submissions, UKBC-REDFERN 530638640 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
With respect to the mode of filing written submissions, there is an increasing trend towards ‘electronic-only’ filings, which
avoids the need for counsel to print and courier (sometimes overseas) large volumes of written submissions to each member of
the tribunal, the tribunal secretary, the arbitral institution, and opposing counsel(s). For example, in April 2020, the ICC issued
a ‘guidance note’ recommending that ‘tribunals should encourage the parties to use electronic means of communication for
the submissions and exhibits to the full extent possible’. 71  ICSID has issued similar guidance; and the ICC and ICSID have
joined other major institutions like the LCIA, AAA, and SCC in allowing parties to submit new requests for arbitration only
in electronic form. 72
(b) Terminology
6. 71
Many different expressions are used to describe written submissions. Examples are ‘statement of claim’, ‘statement of case’,
‘memorial’, and ‘points of claim’. These lead to corresponding expressions such as ‘statement of defence’, ‘statement of reply’,
‘counter-memorial’, and so forth, with ‘reply’, ‘rejoinder’, ‘replique’, ‘duplique’, and similar phrases being used for additional
rounds of written submissions.
6. 72
The different expressions used to describe written submissions are not wholly interchangeable and none are capable of precise
definition. In general, it may be said that the term ‘points of claim’ indicates a relatively short document, the primary purpose
of which is to define the issues and state the facts upon which the claimant’s claims are founded. By contrast, the expressions
‘statement of claim’ and ‘memorial’ imply a more comprehensive documentary submission, intended to include argument
relating to the legal issues, as well as incorporating (in annexes or appendices) the documentary evidence relied upon and the
written testimony of witnesses, together with any experts’ reports on matters of opinion.
(c) Time and length limits
6. 73
There is no such thing as a standard time limit in international arbitration, although periods of up to three months between
submissions are not uncommon. Arbitrators should recognise, however, that the longer the time limits, the lengthier the written
submissions are likely to be. Whilst this might be considered a matter for the parties (who pay their lawyers’ fees), a trend
appears to be developing in international arbitration for the submission of exhaustive written submissions, which are heavy
with hyperbole and repetition. Not only does this add considerably to the time and cost of proceedings, but it can hinder a
tribunal’s understanding of a case. Increasingly, therefore, arbitral tribunals (empowered by certain institutional rules) are now
considering the imposition of page limits on the parties’ written submissions. 73
Footnotes
65
LCIA Rules, Art. 15.6.
66
Swiss Rules, Arts 20, 21, 24.
67
ICSID Rules, r. 30.1.
68
ICSID Rules, r. 30.2.
69
The Note was included in the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules) of January 1968,
referring to r. 30.3, which is r. 31.3 in the current 2006 edition of the Rules: see Rayfuse, ISCID Reports, Vol. 1: Reports
of Cases Decided under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States, 1965 (Grotius, 1993), p. 93.

Section D. - Written Submissions, UKBC-REDFERN 530638640 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
70
White & Case and Queen Mary University of London, Current and Preferred Practices in the Arbitral Process (2012),
available online at http://www.arbitration.qmul.ac.uk/research/2012/index.html, found that 82 per cent of respondents
said that sequential exchange was the most common approach, with 79 per cent expressing a preference for it.
71
ICC Guidance Note on Possible Measures Aimed at Mitigating the Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic, 9 April 2020,
para. 13.
72
Ibid., 
at 
para. 
11; 
ICSID 
Makes 
Electronic 
Filing 
its 
Default 
Procedure, 
13 
March 
2020,
available 
online 
at 
https://icsid.worldbank.org/news-and-events/news-releases/icsid-makes-electronic-filing-its-
default-procedure?CID=359; LCIA Rules, Art. 4; AAA Rules, R-4.f.
73
Partasides, ‘A few words on prolixity in international arbitration’, in Carlevaris, Lévy, Mourre, Schwartz (eds.)
International Arbitration Under Review: Essays in Honour of John Beechey (International Chamber of Commerce,2015),
p. 301; the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal considered ‘the reasons for the delay, the prejudice to the other party,
and the effect of admitting the late-filed counterclaim on the orderly progress of the case’: Holtzmann, ‘Some lessons
of the Iran–United States Claims Tribunal’, in Landwehr (ed.) Private Investors Abroad: Problems and Solutions in
International Business (Bender, 1988), p. 5. See also UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 22; LCIA Rules, Art. 14.6.i; ICC Rules,
Appendix VI, Art. 3.4.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
