Article 17(1): Change in party representation, UKBC-ICCARBN 516551527 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 17(1): Change in party representation
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 17(1): Change in party representation
“Each party must promptly inform the Secretariat, the arbitral tribunal and the other parties of any changes in its
representation.”
17-5
The first paragraph of art.17 was introduced with the 2021 Rules. It requires now each party to “promptly” inform the Secretariat,
the Tribunal and the other parties of any change in its representation. The newly stated obligation is common sense and common
practice. A party that changes counsel, and that wishes that its new counsel receive any communications from either the
Secretariat and the Tribunal will inform them accordingly by providing the name and contact details of its new representatives.
In Terms of Reference, many tribunals added a provision to this effect, as they want to be certain that its communications can
always reach the parties. The true reason why the ICC added this new paragraph becomes clear from art.17(2) and the statement
made at para.13 of the 2021 ICC Note, which reads: “Once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted, the parties should refrain
from introducing a new representative if a relationship exists between that representative and one or more of the arbitrators that
affects the arbitrator’s independence and impartiality.”
17-6
Although the Note does not and cannot impose a new contractual obligation on the parties as such, 14  it is an admonition that
parties will want to take seriously, in particular in light of the power that is now given in art.17(2) to the Tribunal to exclude the
newly appointed party representative from the proceedings. The underlying rationale of the ICC’s admonition to the parties is
the desire and need to have the integrity of the arbitral proceedings preserved as much as possible, once the Tribunal has been
constituted. Parties are therefore invited not to appoint new counsel when that is likely to create a conflict of interest for the
Tribunal. In any event, if there is to be a change in the party representation, it should be notified “promptly.” The (2013) IBA
Guidelines on Party representation in International Arbitration address that situation in its Guidelines 4 and 5. 15
Footnotes
14
See Silva Romero, “Le règlement d’arbitrage de la Chambre commerciale internationale (CCI) de 2021” [2020] Rev.
Arb. No.4, p.949, in particular at p.976, who considers that the legal basis for the obligation set out in the ICC Note
could be seen in the principle of good faith and its corollary principle of procedural loyalty.
15
They are reproduced at App.6.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
