The parties’ agreement, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407008 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
The parties’ agreement
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
The parties’ agreement
22-19
Article 22(2) gives precedence to any agreement among the parties as to the procedure to be adopted. Even after having consulted
the parties, the Tribunal is not free to adopt the procedural measures it considers to be appropriate, if it turns out that such
measures would be contrary to the parties’ agreement. Such agreement can be found in the arbitration clause, or may have been
reached by the parties after the start of the arbitral proceedings. From the Tribunal’s perspective of an expeditious and cost-
efficient arbitration, the parties’ agreement may not be as cost-effective or expeditious as it could be. Article 22(2) requires the
Tribunal to respect such an agreement. However, due to the Tribunal’s duty to “make every effort to conduct the arbitration in
an expeditious and cost-effective manner”, the Tribunal may raise any concerns that it has with respect to the procedure agreed
to by the parties with the parties.
22-20
In any event, the measures adopted by the Tribunal span a variety of procedural matters, depending on the complexity of the
case and the amount in dispute. The case management conference provided for in art.24 is only one of the means facilitating
an effective case administration. Article 22(2) is in this sense broader, and relates to all the measures that the arbitrators, after
consulting with the parties, deem fit on a case-by-case basis.
22-21
The range of measures that arbitrators may take under art.22(2) include deciding upon extension of deadlines, summary
dispositions of claims or addressing issues not dealt with in the Terms of Reference because, for instance, they were not deemed
necessary at that stage, like having a document production stage or ensuring translation services during the evidentiary hearings.
Other more complicated examples include suspension due to other proceedings, such as parallel arbitral proceedings, pending
criminal proceedings, or anti-arbitration injunctions (either with respect to the arbitration or which a party seeks from the
Tribunal), which we will briefly address below.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
