Section C. - Emergency Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638626 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section C. - Emergency Arbitrators
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 4 - Establishment and Organisation of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section C. - Emergency Arbitrators
4. 11
As discussed later in this chapter, it takes time to constitute an arbitral tribunal and a party to the prospective arbitration may
be in a position in which it cannot afford to wait. For example, it may need to take urgent action to prevent evidence being
concealed or destroyed, or to stop an unjustified call on a bank guarantee or to prevent the transfer of assets out of the jurisdiction
in which they are situated. To cater for such situations, if such relief is required prior to an arbitral tribunal being constituted, the
main institutional arbitration rules provide for the appointment of Emergency Arbitrators as an alternative to the parties seeking
interim relief from national courts. For example, the ICC, 14  the LCIA, 15  the International Centre for Dispute Resolution
(ICDR), 16  the Swiss Arbitration Centre, 17  the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce (SCC), 18  the Hong Kong International
Arbitration Centre (HKIAC), 19  the Singapore International Arbitration Centre (SIAC), 20  the International Institute for Conflict
Prevention and Resolution (CPR) Rules, 21  and the Milan Chamber of Arbitration 22  all provide for Emergency Arbitrator
appointments.
4. 12
Recent changes to these rules ensure that they now apply automatically and do not require a specific opt-in, which had previously
limited their scope.
4. 13
In general, the rules allow parties to appoint an Emergency Arbitrator to determine applications for interim relief as soon as a
request for arbitration has been filed or, in some cases, even earlier. 23  Indeed, some institutional rules now give the Emergency
Arbitrator the power to order ex parte relief, subject to the other party being heard immediately after the preliminary order is
granted. 24
4. 14
A useful example of the appointment mechanism is set out in the ICC Rules, under which a party may ask the ICC to
consider the appointment of an Emergency Arbitrator by sending an application to the Secretariat, together with the relevant
supporting documentation and payment of the prescribed fee. 25  If the application is made before the applicant files its Request
for Arbitration, such a Request must be sent to the Secretariat within ten days to avoid the termination of the emergency
proceedings. 26  The Emergency Arbitrator will normally be appointed within two days of the application and must make an
order within fifteen days of receiving the file (although this can be extended by the President of the ICC Court pursuant to a
reasoned request from the Emergency Arbitrator or if deemed necessary). 27  However, the procedure will not be available if: (a)
the arbitration agreement between the parties was concluded before the date on which Emergency Arbitrator provisions were
introduced into the Rules (January 2012); or (b) the parties have agreed to opt out of these provisions; or (c) the arbitration
agreement upon which the application is based arises from a treaty. 28
4. 15
Under most rules, including the ICC Rules, the Emergency Arbitrator’s decision is interim in nature and will not bind the arbitral
tribunal. 29  Although Article 29.2 of the ICC Rules requires the parties to undertake to comply with any order made by the
Emergency Arbitrator, the consequences of non-compliance are uncertain. Parties will still need to rely on the support of the
national courts to enforce interim measures granted by an Emergency Arbitrator and it is not yet clear whether such enforcement
will be granted, given that an interim ‘order’ is unlikely to qualify as an award and therefore be enforceable under the New

Section C. - Emergency Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638626 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
York Convention. 30  However, in some jurisdictions, specific legislative changes have been introduced to ensure that the orders
of Emergency Arbitrators are treated in the same way as those of an arbitral tribunal. 31
Footnotes
14
ICC Rules, Art. 29 and Appendix V.
15
In addition to providing for the expedited formation of the arbitral tribunal (Art. 9A), the LCIA Rules provide for
the appointment of an emergency arbitrator at any time prior to the formation or expedited formation of the arbitral
tribunal (Art. 9B). Any such application must set out the specific grounds for requiring the appointment of an emergency
arbitrator and the specific claim for emergency relief. Importantly, the Rules provide that any such application will not
prejudice a party’s right to apply to a national court for interim or conservatory measures before the formation of the
arbitral tribunal (Art. 9B.13).
16
ICDR Rules, Art. 7.
17
Swiss Rules, Art. 43.
18
SCC Rules, Appendix II.
19
HKIAC Rules, Art. 23; Sch. 4.
20
SIAC Rules, Art. 30.2; Sch. 1.
21
International Institute for Conflict Prevention and Resolution (CPR) Rules, r. 14.
22
Milan Chamber of Arbitration Rules, Art. 44. However, because Italian law does not allow arbitrators to issue interim
orders (Italian Code of Civil Procedure, art. 818), provisional measures ordered by Emergency Arbitrators have a
contractual nature.
23
The LCIA Rules (Art. 9B), ICC Rules (Art. 29.1), SCC Rules (see Appendix II, Art. 9.4.iii), and the Swiss Rules (Art.
43) permit the appointment of an Emergency Arbitrator before the notice of arbitration is filed. Others, including the
SIAC (Sch. 1, Art. 1), ICDR (Art. 7.1 in fine), and ACICA Rules (Art. 33; Sch. 1, Art. 1.1.2.b), require that it be filed
with or after the notice of arbitration.
24
For example, Swiss Rules, Arts 43.1 and 26.3.
25
ICC Rules, Art. 29 and Appendix V, Art. 1.3. The costs of an Emergency Arbitrator Proceeding is set out in Appendix
V, Art. 7.1. By the year 2020, the ICC had received more than 140 applications for the appointment of an Emergency
Arbitrator.
26
ICC Rules, Appendix V, Art. 1.6.
27
ICC Rules, Appendix V, Arts 2.1 and 6.4.
28
ICC Rules, Art. 29.6.
29
ICC Rules, Art. 29.3.
30
See Raid Abu-Manneh, ‘Emergency Arbitrators: the Case for Enforcement’, IBA Arbitration Committee (2021),
available online at https://www.ibanet.org/LPD/Dispute_Resolution_Section/Arbitration/Publications.aspx.
31
For example, the Singapore International Arbitration Act 2012 (art. 2.1) was amended so that the definition of ‘arbitral
tribunal’ included Emergency Arbitrators.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
