Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638597 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration
1. 19
There is no such thing as a typical international arbitration. There are so many arbitral institutions, so many parties, tribunals,
and lawyers of different legal and cultural backgrounds and nationalities and such a range of possible disputes that there would
be little point in trying to give a detailed description of a particular dispute and claiming that it was in some way ‘typical’. What
seems to the authors to be more helpful is to set out briefly the key elements of any international arbitration, all of which are
developed more fully in later chapters. These are:
 
• the agreement to arbitrate
 
• the place of arbitration
 
• the commencement of an arbitration
 
• the appointment of the arbitral tribunal
 
• arbitral proceedings
 
• the award of the tribunal
 
• the enforcement of the award.
(a) The agreement to arbitrate
1. 20
The foundation stone of modern international arbitration is consent. Such consent must be reflected by a valid agreement
between the parties to submit any disputes or differences to arbitration. 18  This is recognised both by national laws and by
international treaties. Under both the New York Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards
(the ‘New York Convention’) 19  and the Model Law, 20  recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may be refused if the
parties to the arbitration agreement were under some incapacity or if the agreement was not valid under its own governing law. 21
1. 21
An ‘agreement to arbitrate’ is usually (but not exclusively) expressed in an arbitration clause in a contract. Arbitration clauses
make it clear that any dispute that arises out of, or in connection with, the contract will be referred to arbitration to the exclusion
of the courts. Arbitration clauses are drawn up and agreed as part of the contract before any dispute has arisen, and so they
necessarily look to the future. Naturally, the parties hope that no dispute will arise but they agree that if it does, it will be resolved
by arbitration and not by the courts.
1. 22
There is a second, less common type of agreement to arbitrate, where the parties agree to submit an existing dispute to arbitration.
This is generally known as a ‘submission agreement’. It will often be more detailed than an arbitration clause, because if a
dispute has already arisen, it is possible to nominate a tribunal and to describe in detail the dispute and how the parties propose
to deal with it.
1. 23

Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638597 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
As already indicated, these two types of arbitration agreement have been joined by a third—namely, the agreement to arbitrate
that arises under international instruments, such as an investment treaty. A feature of such treaties is that each state party to
the treaty agrees to submit to international arbitration any dispute that might arise in the future between itself and a qualifying
‘investor’. 22  This ‘investor’ is not a party to the treaty. Indeed, the investor’s identity is unknown when the treaty is made.
Hence this ‘agreement to arbitrate’ in effect constitutes a ‘standing offer’ by the state concerned to resolve any ‘investment’
disputes by arbitration; and a qualifying investor may ‘accept’ this offer by an unequivocal act, such as the dispatch of a letter
or by taking a step pursuant to the dispute resolution process, for instance, by sending to the state concerned a Notice of Dispute
or a Request for Arbitration. 23
1. 24
There are other important matters to consider, including the enforcement of arbitration agreements, the need for a dispute, and
the concept of arbitrability. These and other topics are more fully considered in Chapter 2.
(b) The place of arbitration
1. 25
Parties to an arbitration agreement may select the seat (or legal place) of arbitration in that agreement or they may leave the
choice until an arbitration is commenced. The selection of a ‘place of arbitration’ is an important matter. It is not simply (or
necessarily at all) a matter of geographical convenience. The place chosen will establish the jurisdiction of the local courts
of that place regarding any review of the arbitral award; and it has other consequences that are considered in Chapter 2. The
chosen place should be in a state that is ‘arbitration friendly’ 24  (that is, a state where there will be no undue or inappropriate
interference with the arbitral process by the local courts and where the state has adhered to the New York Convention, in
order to provide a straightforward and effective method for the recognition and enforcement of the arbitral tribunal’s award if
enforcement becomes necessary). It is noteworthy that the selection of the seat (or legal place) of arbitration does not require
hearings to take place there, as the parties and the arbitrators usually have discretion to hold hearings at a location other than
the place of arbitration for reasons of convenience and efficiency.
(c) Commencement of an arbitration
1. 26
A formal notice must be given in order to start an arbitration. In ad hoc arbitrations, this notice will be sent or delivered to
the opposing party.
1. 27
For example, Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides that:
 
1.The party or parties initiating recourse to arbitration (hereinafter called the ‘claimant’) shall communicate to the other
party or parties (hereinafter called the ‘respondent’) a notice of arbitration.
 
2.Arbitration proceedings shall be deemed to commence on the date on which the notice of arbitration is received by the
respondent.
1. 28
The UNCITRAL Rules then state what should be set out in the notice of arbitration. This includes a reference to the arbitration
clause in the contract (or to any other form of arbitration agreement), a brief description of the claim, an indication of the amount
involved in the dispute, and a statement of the relief or remedy sought. The notice of arbitration may also include proposals for
the appointment of a sole arbitrator or the appointment of the arbitral tribunal.
1. 29

Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638597 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
In an arbitration governed by the rules of an arbitral institution it is usual for the notice to be given to that institution by a
‘request for arbitration’ or similar document. The institution then notifies the respondent or respondents. For example, Article
4.1 of the ICC Rules provides that:
A party wishing to have recourse to arbitration under the Rules shall submit its Request for Arbitration (the
‘Request’) to the Secretariat at any of the offices specified in the Internal Rules. The Secretariat shall notify the
claimant and respondent of the receipt of the Request and the date of such receipt.
1. 30
Similar provisions are found in the rules of other arbitral institutions. 25
(d) Appointment of the arbitral tribunal
1. 31
The ability of the parties to participate in the selection of the tribunal that will be responsible for deciding their dispute is a
fundamental difference between international arbitration and judicial resolution and is likely to give the parties confidence in
the dispute resolution process in which they are about to take part. 26
1. 32
Considerable time and effort is usually spent by parties in identifying independent and impartial candidates who would be well
suited to the resolution of their particular dispute (for example, because of their arbitral experience, or their legal or cultural
background, linguistic abilities, or technical knowledge). Making the right choice of arbitrator is one of the most important
decisions in any case. As Professor Pierre Lalive wrote: ‘[t]he choice of the persons who compose the arbitral tribunal is vital
and often the most decisive step in an arbitration. It has rightly been said that arbitration is only as good as the arbitrators.’ 27
Indeed, a skilled, experienced, and impartial arbitrator selected from the full pool of suitable candidates is essential for a fair
and effective arbitration. 28
1. 33
It is important to recognise that an international arbitration demands different qualities in an arbitrator from those required for
a domestic arbitration. In an international arbitration, different rules and different systems of law will apply; the parties will
almost certainly be of different nationalities; and the arbitration itself will usually take place in a third neutral country. Indeed,
the place of arbitration will usually have been chosen precisely because it is neutral, so that no party has the advantage of
‘playing at home’.
1. 34
There is a risk that in identifying possible candidates, parties and their counsel revert to candidates with whom they are already
familiar, which has tended to result in repeat appointments and a lack of diversity in such appointments. 29  In order to ensure the
renovation of the pool of arbitrators and to provide multiple perspectives on a tribunal, it is important to ensure that candidates
are considered from diverse backgrounds and that female arbitrators feature prominently in such consideration with a view to
moving towards equality between the number of male and female appointments. To help achieve this goal, in 2015 a group
of practitioners launched the ‘Equal Representation in Arbitration Pledge’ which seeks to rectify the under-representation of
women on arbitral tribunals by requiring signatories to consider female arbitrators on an equal opportunity basis. In simple terms,
amongst other commitments, most arbitral institutions, practitioners, and many frequent users of arbitration have committed to
ensure a fair representation of women on lists of arbitrator candidates. 30
1. 35
Ensuring equal gender representation is only part of this discussion. It is equally important to provide opportunities to younger
arbitrators and to ethnic minorities who are also under-represented. The first step in any such process is recognition of the need
for action. The hope for the future is to see a corps of international arbitrators that reflects all the perspectives of the international
commercial community that it serves.

Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638597 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
1. 36
The fact that a party may choose an arbitrator does not give it a carte blanche to choose whoever it pleases. In particular, all
arbitrators (including party appointed arbitrators) must be independent and impartial of the parties to the dispute. 31  In general
terms, independence refers to the connections that an arbitrator might have with the parties or their counsel, whereas impartiality
focuses on an arbitrator’s ability to analyse the dispute without pre-judgement (for instance, if an arbitrator has already decided
the same point of law in another case and so could arguably be held to have prejudged the issue). The leading arbitral institutions,
as well as national laws based on the Model Law, confront this problem with provisions for disclosure by a prospective arbitrator
of any circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his or her independence or impartiality. 32
1. 37
Historically, there was a risk that lawyers trained in different jurisdictions would have a different concept of independence
and impartiality. The perception that different standards were being applied led the IBA to create a committee of arbitration
specialists representing major legal cultures and traditions in order to reach a consensus as to the proper practice in international
arbitration. The result was the IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration, the first edition of which was
published in 2004. They establish general guidelines and a non-exhaustive ‘traffic light’ system of situations where a potential
arbitrator should decline appointment (red list), only accept with the express waiver of all parties (waivable red list), only accept
with disclosure (orange list), or accept unconditionally (green list). Although not hard law, the Guidelines are an example of
the growing body of ‘soft law’; they are almost universally accepted as an appropriate standard and they are followed by the
vast majority of parties and tribunals. Their popularity is reflected by revised versions published in 2014 and 2020. They will
be addressed in detail in Chapter 4.
1. 38
Having looked briefly at the qualities that an arbitrator must possess (a topic that is also discussed in more detail in Chapter 4)
what is the process for establishment of the arbitral tribunal?
(i) A sole arbitrator
1. 39
If the dispute is to be referred to a sole arbitrator, the selection of that arbitrator will generally be left to the parties, with a
‘fall-back’ or ‘default’ provision in case they are unable to agree. The ICC Rules, for example, provide at Article 12.3 that:
Where the parties have agreed that the dispute shall be resolved by a sole arbitrator, they may, by agreement,
nominate the sole arbitrator for confirmation. 33
This is followed by a default provision, so that if the parties fail to agree on an arbitrator, the ICC Court will itself select
and appoint a suitable person.
1. 40
If the parties are able to agree upon the selection of a sole arbitrator (and this is not always easy), they will be able to go
forward with the proceedings in the knowledge that they have jointly chosen someone in whose impartiality and judgement
they are prepared to trust to resolve their dispute. If the parties are not able to agree, they will have to rely upon an ‘appointing
authority’ to make the designation. This appointing authority may be the institution under whose rules the arbitration is to
proceed (as under the ICC Rules) or it may be the relevant domestic court in a pure ad hoc arbitration (as under the Model
Law). At the moment of drafting the arbitration agreement, a reputable arbitral institution is to be preferred over a court (or
some other non-arbitral body, such as the local bar association). This is because the institution and its secretariat are likely to
be far more aware than a court of the available pool of suitably qualified arbitrators. They are also likely to be more attuned
to the qualifications needed in the arbitrator, the need to ensure a diverse panel, and to the types of conflicts of interest that
might lead to the challenge of the chosen arbitrator. 34

Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638597 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
(ii) A tribunal of three arbitrators
1. 41
If the dispute is to be referred to a tribunal of three arbitrators, it is usual for each party to be given the right to nominate
one arbitrator. The parties will often refer to this person as ‘their arbitrator’. However, this arbitrator is under the same duty
of independence and impartiality, and under the same duty to disclose possible conflicts of interest, as the other members
of the tribunal.
1. 42
Sometimes the parties are able to agree upon the nomination of the third arbitrator. They may do this either directly, by
discussions between themselves, or by delegating the task to the nominated co-arbitrators. If the parties choose the latter
course, the nominated co-arbitrators will discuss between themselves possible choices and try to agree on a potential third
(presiding) arbitrator. When the co-arbitrators have made a decision, the convention is that they may inform the party that
appointed them of their prospective choice. This is not intended to give the parties a veto on that choice, but simply to ensure
that there is nothing (such as previous conflicts) which would make it genuinely difficult for a party to accept that candidate.
Agreement on the choice of a presiding arbitrator is the ideal. It enables the parties to proceed confidently with the arbitration
given their participation, whether directly or by delegation, in the appointment of the presiding arbitrator, who will rank as
‘first amongst equals’.
1. 43
Various default provisions are available for selection of the third arbitrator if the parties are unable to reach agreement
upon a suitable candidate. One option is for the co-arbitrators to agree between themselves (which would require an
express agreement). Otherwise, in an institutional arbitration, the supervising institution will make the appointment. 35  In an
UNCITRAL ad hoc arbitration, the designation will be made by the ‘Appointing Authority’ agreed by the parties or (in the
absence of agreement) designated by the Secretary General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration. 36
1. 44
The system of party-nominated arbitrators is not without its critics. One of the authors, in a Freshfields lecture 37  about
dissenting opinions in international arbitration, noted that they were almost invariably given by a party-nominated arbitrator
in favour of the party that had nominated that arbitrator. A later study (focusing on investment arbitration where there is
publicity of awards) reached the disappointing conclusion that:
The practice of dissent in investment arbitrations may even have reached the point where a party-appointed
arbitrator is now expected to dissent if a party that appoints him or her has lost the case entirely or in part. 38
1. 45
As discussed later in Chapter 4, it is sometimes suggested that the system of party-appointed arbitrators, although greatly
favoured by users, should be abandoned in favour of selection by an exchange of lists, an algorithm, or some other method.
(e) The arbitral proceedings
1. 46
There are no compulsory rules of procedure in international arbitration and no volumes containing ‘the rules of court’ to govern
the conduct of the arbitration. Litigators who produce their own country’s rulebook or code of civil procedure as a ‘helpful
guideline’ will be told to put it to one side and forget it!
1. 47

Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638597 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
The rules that govern an international arbitration are first, the mandatory provisions of the lex arbitri (the law of the place of
arbitration) which are usually cast in very broad terms; 39  and secondly the arbitration rules that the parties themselves may have
chosen, such as the rules of the ICC or UNCITRAL. Under the heading of ‘General Provisions’, Article 17 of the UNCITRAL
Rules states:
Subject to these Rules, the arbitral tribunal may conduct the arbitration in such manner as it considers appropriate,
provided that the parties are treated with equality and that at an appropriate stage of the proceedings each party
is given a reasonable opportunity of presenting his case. The arbitral tribunal, in exercising its discretion, shall
conduct the proceedings so as to avoid unnecessary delay and expense and to provide a fair and efficient process
for resolving the parties’ dispute.
1. 48
Within the broad outline of any applicable rules, parties to an international arbitration are free to design a procedure suitable
for their particular dispute. This is another of the attractions of international arbitration. It is (or should be) a flexible method
of dispute resolution. The procedure to be followed can be tailored by the parties and the arbitral tribunal to meet the law and
facts of the dispute. It is not a Procrustean bed, enforcing conformity without regard to individual variation.
(f) Ending the dispute: settlement or arbitral award
1. 49
In the course of the arbitral proceedings, a settlement is frequently reached between the parties. Rules of arbitration usually
make provision for this. Article 36.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules, for example, states:
If, before the award is made, the parties agree on a settlement of the dispute, the arbitral tribunal shall either issue
an order for the termination of the arbitral proceedings or, if requested by both parties and accepted by the arbitral
tribunal, record the settlement in the form of an arbitral award on agreed terms. The arbitral tribunal is not obliged
to give reasons for such an award.
1. 50
If the parties themselves cannot resolve their dispute, the power and duty of the arbitral tribunal is to resolve it for them by
making a binding decision, in the form of a written award.
1. 51
The power (and the duty) of an arbitral tribunal to make binding decisions distinguishes arbitration as a method of resolving
disputes from other procedures, such as mediation and conciliation, which aim to arrive at a negotiated settlement. The procedure
to be followed in arbitration to arrive at a binding decision is flexible and adaptable to the circumstances of each particular case.
Nevertheless, it is a judicial procedure. Any failure by a tribunal to act judicially (that is, respecting the equality of the parties
with each party given an opportunity to present its case) may be sanctioned by annulment or non-enforcement of that tribunal’s
award. 40  No similar enforceable requirement governs the procedures to be followed where parties are assisted in arriving at a
negotiated settlement by mediation, conciliation, or some other process of this kind. 41
1. 52
How an arbitral tribunal reaches its decision is a complex process. 42  For a sole arbitrator, the task of decision-making is a
solitary one: impressions as to the honesty and reliability of the witnesses; opinions on the merits that may have swayed from
one side to the other as the arbitral process unfolds; points that have seemed compelling under the eloquence of counsel, will
all have to be reviewed and re-considered once the hearing is over and any post-hearing briefs are received. Justice, money,
and reputations depend on the arbitrator’s verdict.
1. 53

Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638597 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
If the arbitral tribunal consists of three arbitrators, the task may be easier in one sense and more difficult in another. It is easier
because the decision does not depend upon one person alone. The arguments of the parties can be reviewed, the opinions of each
arbitrator can be tested and the facts of the case and the relevant law can be freely discussed. It is at the same time more difficult,
because three different opinions may well emerge during the course of the tribunal’s deliberations. It will then be necessary for
the presiding arbitrator to try to reconcile those differences, rather than face the unwelcome prospect of a dissenting opinion.
1. 54
Experienced commentators remain divided on the question of whether or not dissenting opinions are of any benefit in
international arbitration. Some see them as beneficial, allowing each arbitrator freedom of expression and demonstrating that
the parties’ arguments have been fully considered. 43  Others, whilst recognising that there are good dissenting opinions, just as
there are good dissenting judgments, 44  are concerned that a dissenting opinion may undermine the authority of the tribunal’s
award. 45  Indeed, a dissenting opinion ‘may provide a platform for challenge to the award’. 46
1. 55
The debate about dissenting opinions has inevitably spilled over from commercial arbitration, in which awards are generally
not publicly available, to investment arbitration, in which a dissenting opinion may have more impact because it is publicly
available. It is to be expected that a party-nominated arbitrator will usually have some sympathy with the party that appointed
him or her (not least because they have been selected because of the party’s perception of their likely conclusions on the issues
in light of past writings or awards). However, this should not prevent that arbitrator behaving impartially, as he or she is required
to do. 47
(g) Enforcement of an award
1. 56
Once an arbitral tribunal has made its final award, it has done what it was established to do. It has fulfilled its function. 48
The award itself, however, gives rise to important, lasting, and potentially public legal consequences. Although the award is
typically the result of a private process of dispute resolution and is made by a private arbitral tribunal, it nevertheless constitutes
a binding decision on the dispute between the parties. If the award is not carried out voluntarily, it may be enforced by legal
proceedings, both locally (that is, by the courts at the place where it was made) and internationally under such international
conventions as the New York Convention.
1. 57
An agreement to arbitrate is not only an agreement to take part in arbitral proceedings. It is also an agreement to comply
voluntarily with any resulting arbitral award. This commitment is set out expressly in many rules of arbitration. Article 35.6
of the ICC Rules, for example, states that:
Every award shall be binding on the parties. By submitting the dispute to arbitration under the Rules, the parties
undertake to carry out any award without delay and shall be deemed to have waived their right to any form of
recourse insofar as such waiver can validly be made.
1. 58
Most arbitral awards are voluntarily carried out by the losing party or parties without the need to refer to any formal legal
compulsion. But when they are not complied with, it may be necessary to seek enforcement by a court of law.
1. 59
But which court of law? This is something that the winning party will need to consider. The usual method for enforcing an
award is to obtain judgment on it. This will generally mean commencing recognition and enforcement proceedings either (a) in
the court of the country in which the losing party resides or has its place of business and/ or (b) in the court of the country in
which the losing party otherwise has assets that may be seized in satisfaction of the award.

Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638597 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
1. 60
It follows that in order to have an effective system of international arbitration it is necessary to have a supporting system of
national legal systems, so that the courts of country A will enforce an arbitration agreement or an arbitral award made in country
B. For this to happen, there must be international treaties or conventions providing for the recognition and enforcement of both
arbitration agreements and arbitral awards by the courts of those countries that are party to that treaty or convention. 49
Footnotes
18
Once there is a valid agreement to arbitrate, the scope of any resulting arbitration may be enlarged, e.g. to cover so-
called ‘non-signatories’, whose consent to arbitrate is a ‘deemed’ or ‘implied’ consent. The issues of non-signatories,
consolidation of arbitrations, and third-party involvement are discussed in more detail in Chapter 2.
19
New York Convention, Art. V.
20
Model Law, Art. 35.
21
New York Convention, Art. V(1)(a); Model Law, Art. 36(1)(a)(i).
22
Investment arbitrations are discussed in Chapter 8.
23
See Dolzer, Kriebaum and Schreuer, Principles of International Investment Law (3rd edn, Oxford University Press,
2022), p. 365.
24
In a thoughtful analysis, Professor Bermann argues that it is not enough that a particular state should be ‘arbitration
friendly’. It is in the long-term interest of international arbitrations that extrinsic values to which the international legal
system as a whole attaches importance should be taken into account: ‘The point is that the international arbitration
community must strive to ensure that, in addressing the concerns and pursuing the values most closely associated with
arbitration practice and its efficacy, it does not fall out of step with extrinsic values to which the legal system as a whole
attaches fundamental importance’: Bermann, ‘What does it mean to be ‘proarbitration?’ (2018) 34 Arb Intl 341–353,
at 352.
25
The LCIA Rules, Art. 1.1 provides that ‘[a]ny party wishing to commence arbitration under the LCIA Rules (“the
Claimant”) shall deliver to the Registrar of the LCIA Court (the “Registrar”) a written request for arbitration’, and
prescribes the relevant content of the request; the ICDR International Arbitration Rules, Art. 2.1 provides that ‘[t]he
party initiating arbitration (“Claimant”) shall, in compliance with Article 11, give written Notice of Arbitration to the
Administrator and at the same time to the party against whom a claim is being made (“Respondent”)’; the ICSID
Convention, Art. 36(1) provides that ‘[a]ny Contracting State or any national of a Contracting State wishing to institute
arbitration proceedings shall address a request to that effect in writing to the Secretary-General who shall send a copy
of the request to the other party’; and the SIAC Rules, r. 3 provides that ‘[a] party wishing to commence an arbitration
under these Rules (the “Claimant”) shall file with the Registrar a Notice of Arbitration’ and prescribes the necessary
contents of the notice.
26
For a discussion of the different roles of arbitrator and judge see Lazareff, ‘L’arbitre est-il un juge?’, in Reymond (ed.)
Liber Amicorum (Litec, 2004), p. 173; Rubino-Sammartano, ‘The decision-making mechanism of the arbitrator vis-à-
vis the judge’ (2008) 25 J Intl Arb 167; Ancel, ‘L’arbitre juge’ (2012) 4 Rev Arb 717. The judgment of the UK Supreme
Court in Halliburton Company v Chubb Bermuda Insurance Ltd. [2020] UKSC 48 also provides an insight into this
issue, at [56]–[62].
27
Lalive, ‘Mélanges en l’honneur de Nicolas Valticos’, in Dupuy (ed.) Droit et Justice: Mélanges en l’honneur de
Nicolas Valticos (CEPANI, 1989), p. 289; see also, e.g., Derains and Levy (eds) Is Arbitration Only as Good as the
Arbitrator? Status, Powers and Role of the Arbitrator (ICC Institute of World Business Law, 2011); Park, ‘Arbitrators
and accuracy’ (2010) 1 J Intl Disp Settlement 25.
28
See Chapter 4 for more discussion of these considerations.
29
See Winkle and Schinazi, ‘No Longer “Pale, Male, and Stale”? Approaching Diversity and Inclusiveness in International
Arbitration, (31 January 2021) in Liber Amicorum Guillermo Aguilar Alvarez, available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3776738 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3776738.
30
See http://www.arbitrationpledge.com/. There are currently nearly 5,000 institutional and individual signatories which
has resulted in material improvements in the percentage of female appointments.
31
Virtually all institutional rules include provisions to this effect. For example, the LCIA Rules, Art. 5.3 provides that ‘[a]ll
arbitrators shall be and remain at all times impartial and independent of the parties; and none shall act in the arbitration as

Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638597 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
advocate for or authorised representative of any party’; the ICC Rules, Art. 11.1 provides that ‘[e]very arbitrator must be
and remain impartial and independent of the parties involved in the arbitration’; the ICDR Rules, Art. 14.1 provides that
‘[a]rbitrators acting under these Rules shall be impartial and independent and shall act in accordance with these Rules,
the terms of the Notice of Appointment provided by the Administrator, and with The Code of Ethics for Arbitrators
in Commercial Disputes’; and the SIAC Rules, r. 13.1 provides that ‘[a]ny arbitrator appointed in an arbitration under
these Rules, whether or not nominated by the parties, shall be and remain at all times independent and impartial’.
32
Article 12(1) of the Model Law provides that ‘[w]hen a person is approached in connection with his possible appointment
as an arbitrator, he shall disclose any circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his impartiality or
independence. An arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and throughout the arbitral proceedings, shall without
delay disclose any such circumstances to the parties unless they have already been informed of them by him.’ By way
of example of provisions in institutional rules, the LCIA Rules provide at Article 5.4 that a prospective arbitrator shall
sign a written declaration stating ‘whether there are any circumstances currently known to the candidate which are likely
to give rise in the mind of any party to any justifiable doubts as to his or her impartiality or independence and, if so,
specifying in full such circumstances’, while Article 11(2) of the ICC Rules provides that ‘[t]he prospective arbitrator
shall disclose in writing to the Secretariat any facts or circumstances which might be of such a nature as to call into
question the arbitrator’s independence in the eyes of the parties, as well as any circumstances that could give rise to
reasonable doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality’.
33
The practice of the ICC and of other arbitral institutions is that it is the institution that formally appoints an arbitrator,
although in doing so they will almost invariably confirm the person nominated by the parties.
34
The difficulties resulting from court appointments are amply illustrated in the UK Supreme Court case of Halliburton
v Chubb. In that case, the High Court appointed an arbitrator who had previously been appointed by one of the parties
and then confirmed that appointment despite objections, leading to many years of litigation. See Halliburton Company
v Chubb Bermuda Insurance Ltd. [2020] UKSC 48.
35
For example, the ICC Rules, Art. 12.5 provides that ‘[w]here the dispute is to be referred to three arbitrators, the third
arbitrator, who will act as president of the arbitral tribunal, shall be appointed by the Court, unless the parties have agreed
upon another procedure for such appointment, in which case the nomination will be subject to confirmation’.
36
See UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 6.
37
Redfern, ‘Dissenting opinions in international commercial arbitration: The good, the bad and the ugly’ (2004) 20 Arb
Intl 223.
38
van den Berg, ‘Dissenting opinions by party-appointed arbitrators in investment arbitration’, in Arsanjani, Katz Cogan,
Sloane, and Wiessner (eds) Looking to the Future: Essays in Honor of W Michael Reisman (Koninklijke Brill, 2010),
p. 821.
39
For example, the Model Law, Art. 18, simply states: ‘The parties shall be treated with equality and each party shall be
given a full opportunity of presenting his case.’
40
For example, the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 33(1)(a) states that the tribunal shall ‘act fairly and impartially as
between the parties, giving each party a reasonable opportunity of putting his case and dealing with that of his opponent’.
This requirement mirrors Model Law, Art. 18, and is found in most developed arbitral systems.
41
The arbitral process also produces a different result from that which might have been reached by the parties through
negotiation, with or without the help of a mediator, since a negotiated agreement will usually result in a compromise
acceptable to both parties.
42
See, e.g., Lowenfeld, ‘The party-appointed arbitrator: Further reflections’, in Newman and Hill (eds) The Leading
Arbitrators’ Guide to International Arbitration (2nd edn, JurisNet, 2008), pp. 46–48; Fortier, ‘The tribunal’s
deliberations’, in Newman and Hill (eds) The Leading Arbitrators’ Guide to International Arbitration (2nd edn, JurisNet,
2008), pp. 477–482; Puig, ‘Deliberation and drafting awards in international arbitration’, in Fernández-Ballesteros and
Arias (eds) Liber Amicorum Bernardo Cremades (La Ley, 2010), pp. 131–158. On the importance of the tribunal’s
deliberations, see Bredin, ‘Retour au délibéré arbitral’, in Bernardini et al. (eds) Liber Amicorum Claude Reymond
(Litec, 2004), p. 50; Derains, ‘La pratique du délibéré arbitral’, in Aksen (ed.) Global Reflections in International Law,
Commerce and Dispute Resolution: Liber Amicorum in Honour of Robert Briner (ICC, 2005), pp. 221–224.
43
Rees and Rohn, ‘Dissenting opinions: Can they fulfill a beneficial role?’ (2009) 25 Arb Intl 329.
44
In the well-known English case of Liversidge v Anderson [1941] 3 All ER 336, Lord Atkin gave a dissenting speech in
which he argued against the power of arbitrary arrest, even in times of war. Almost four years later, Lord Diplock said that
the time had come to acknowledge that the majority were ‘expediently and, at that time, perhaps excusably wrong and
the dissenting speech of Lord Atkin was right’: Inland Revenue Commissioners v Rossminster [1980] AC 952, at 1008.
45
Redfern, ‘Dissenting opinions in international commercial arbitration: The good, the bad and the ugly’ (2004) 20 Arb
Intl 223.

Section B. - Outline of an International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638597 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
46
Baker and Greenwood, ‘Dissent—but only if you really feel you must: Why dissenting opinions in international
commercial arbitration should only appear in exceptional circumstances’ (2013) 7 Disp Res Intl 31.
47
A response to the criticism of both party-appointed arbitrators and arbitrators dissenting in favour of their appointing
party is offered in Brower and Rosenberg, ‘The death of the two-headed nightingale: Why the Paulsson–van den Berg
presumption that party-appointed arbitrators are untrustworthy is wrong’ (2013) 29 Arb Intl 7; van den Berg, ‘Charles
Brower’s problem with 10%: Dissenting opinions by party-appointed arbitrators in investment arbitration’ (2015) 31
Arb Intl 381.
48
Save for incidental matters such as the interpretation of the award or correction of obvious errors for which the tribunal
remains in being for a limited period of time, and save also for those rare cases in which the tribunal may be required
by a court to reconsider its decision: see Chapter 9.
49
These conventions are reviewed in more detail later in this chapter.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
