Mandatory law applicable to transactions, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407054 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Mandatory law applicable to transactions
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Mandatory law applicable to transactions
21-48
When parties agree on, or the Tribunal determines, applicable rules of law under art.21(1), those rules of law are most frequently
those of a national legal system. The rules of law applicable to the merits of a dispute include all of the relevant law, including
mandatory principles of that law to the extent that those mandatory principles are applicable in the context of what may be an
international transaction. For example, if French law is applicable to a construction contract to be performed in France, then,
in the authors’ view, all principles of mandatory French law that would be applicable to a French construction contract are
applicable. Otherwise, a Tribunal is not applying French law as it is required to do under the Rules.
21-49
All major places of arbitration provide that awards may be annulled for failure to respect some form of public policy. 153
Article 36 of the UNCITRAL Model Law provides that the award may be annulled “if the court finds that … the recognition
or enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of this State”. Article V(2) of the New York Convention
is of similar effect.
21-50
In many jurisdictions, upon application for annulment, the courts take a restrictive view of public policy. Therefore, generally
many rules of law that are viewed as mandatory are not the basis for successful applications to annul awards. For the authors, this
reflects the restrictive approach with respect to annulment procedures in most major centres of arbitration. The Tribunal has the
right to err with respect to the application of substantive law and, in many instances with respect to the application of mandatory
principles of substantive law. However, in the authors’ view that does not obviate the need to apply applicable mandatory
principles of the rules of law applicable to the merits of the dispute. The parties have chosen, or the Tribunal has determined,
the rules of law that are applicable and those rules should be applied—including the mandatory principles. Nevertheless, unlike
with judges in domestic courts, the parties have also chosen international arbitration and thereby give a certain primacy to the
terms of their contract in particular. 154
21-51
Whatever the rules of law applicable to the underlying contract, an arbitration may be subject to mandatory legal principles
of other jurisdictions and in particular to the law of the place of arbitration and the law of the place of performance of the
contract. 155  The autonomy of the parties with respect to the choice of the law on the merits does not permit the parties or the
Tribunal to ignore mandatory law of the place of arbitration or the place of performance. Nor should the Tribunal ignore the
mandatory law of the probable place of enforcement given its duties under art.42, if it is raised by the parties. A recent study
shows that Tribunals do not appear to raise mandatory law sua sponte but will deal with the issues if raised and if they are raised
by the parties if the public policy issues are of fundamental importance. 156
21-52
The trend in most jurisdictions is to restrict annulment of awards for failure to apply mandatory law to situations in which the
result is a breach of international public policy. As with the application of mandatory principles of the rules of law governing
the merits of the dispute, the Tribunal generally has the right to err with respect to the application of mandatory principles of
the law of the place of arbitration or the place of performance. However, as noted above, in the authors’ view, that does not
justify ignoring mandatory rules of law to the extent that they are applicable in the context of the transaction dealt with in the
ICC arbitration. Moreover, there are some noteworthy limitations with respect to this trend.

Mandatory law applicable to transactions, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407054 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
21-53
In the Fosmax case, 157  the ICC tribunal decided that the contract was subject to French private law (and not administrative
law) and, as a result, rejected Fosmax’s claim for reimbursement of costs incurred with a third party contractor who carried out
work that should have been carried out by the consortium. The French Counsel of State partially annulled the ICC award on
the basis that, as a result of applying solely private law (and not administrative law), the Tribunal had rejected claims of a party
in breach of a mandatory provision of French administrative law.
Footnotes
153
See art.1520 of the French CPC and more generally, Clay, op. cit., pp.292–295 and pp.319–323, art.190 of the Swiss
PILA, s.10 of the US Federal Arbitration Act and s.68 of the English Arbitration Act 1996.
154
For a discussion see Park, “The Predictability Paradox: Arbitrators and Applicable Law”, Dossier of the ICC Institute
of World Business Law: The Application of Substantive Law by International Arbitrators (2014) 60.
155
For a discussion, see Nairac, Aleynikova and Thadikkaran, “To What Extent do Arbitral Tribunals Take Into Account
Public Policy in the Jurisdictions of Prospective Enforcement of an Award? An Analysis of ICC Awards”, [2016] ICC
DR Bull. 55 and the extracts of cases published with the article.
156
See Nairac, Aleynikova and Thadikkaran, “To What Extent do Arbitral Tribunals Take Into Account Public Policy in
the Jurisdictions of Prospective Enforcement of an Award? An Analysis of ICC Awards”, [2016] ICC DR Bull. 55.
157
ICC Case No.18466 . Conseil d’Etat, 9 November 2016 (http://www.conseil-etat.fr/Decisions-Avis-Publications/
Decisions/Selection-des-decisions-faisant-l-objet-d-une-communication-particuliere/CE-9-novembre-2016-societe-
Fosmax-LNG [accessed 17 August 2021]. For a discussion, see Laazouzi, France: “Judicial Review of International
Arbitration Awards in Disputes Related to Administrative Contracts” [2017] ICC DR Bull. No.2.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
