Section B. - Categories of Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638660 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section B. - Categories of Award
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 9 - Award
Section B. - Categories of Award
9. 19
All awards are final and binding, subject to any available challenges. 27  However, the term ‘final award’ is customarily reserved
for an award that completes the mission of the arbitral tribunal. Subject to certain exceptions, the delivery of a final award
renders the arbitral tribunal functus officio: it ceases to have any further jurisdiction in respect of the dispute, and the special
relationship that exists between the arbitral tribunal and the parties during the currency of the arbitration ends. This has
significant consequences. An arbitral tribunal should not issue a final award until it is satisfied that its mission has actually been
completed. If there are outstanding matters to be determined, such as questions relating to costs (including the arbitral tribunal’s
own costs), the arbitral tribunal should issue an award expressly designated as a partial award.
(a) Partial awards
9. 20
The power to issue a partial award is a useful weapon in the armoury of an arbitral tribunal. A partial award is an effective way
of determining matters that are susceptible to determination during the course of the proceedings, and which, once determined,
may save considerable time and money for all involved. 28  One obvious example that has already been given is where an issue
of jurisdiction is involved: a partial award on such an issue may shorten, or at least simplify, the proceedings considerably. An
arbitral tribunal that spent months hearing a dispute, only to rule in its final award that it had no jurisdiction, would (to put
it mildly) appear inefficient (unless the issue of jurisdiction were inseparably bound up with the merits of the case). Another
example is a partial award that makes an early determination that a particular claim or defence is manifestly without legal merit
(as is now possible under some but not all institutional rules). 29  Such an early partial award avoids the time and expense that
would otherwise be incurred in litigating a manifestly unmeritorious claim or defence in full.
9. 21
The power of an arbitral tribunal to issue partial awards may derive from the arbitration agreement or from the applicable law.
Where the arbitration agreement incorporates international or institutional rules of arbitration, these rules generally contain
provisions for the making of such awards. 30
9. 22
The ICC Rules, for instance, define the term ‘award’ to include ‘an interim, partial, or final award’. 31  In practice, partial awards
are frequently made in ICC arbitrations, particularly where jurisdiction is challenged or the proper law has to be determined by
the arbitral tribunal. 32  The Rules of the LCIA follow the same approach: ‘The Arbitral Tribunal may make separate awards on
different issues at different times. Such awards shall have the same status and effect as any other award made by the Arbitral
Tribunal.’ 33  The SIAC Rules similarly provide that the ‘Tribunal may make separate Awards on different issues at different
times’. 34
9. 23
In an ad hoc arbitration, it is usual to make express provision in the submission agreement for the arbitral tribunal to issue partial
awards, if it sees fit to do so. Where the power is not conferred expressly upon the arbitral tribunal by the agreement of the parties,
it may nevertheless be conferred by operation of law. For example, section 47 of the English Arbitration Act 1996 provides:

Section B. - Categories of Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638660 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Section 47
(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the tribunal may make more than one award at different times on
different aspects of the matters to be determined.
(2) The tribunal may, in particular, make an award relating to:
(a) an issue affecting the whole claim, or
(b) a part only of the claims or cross-claims submitted to it for decision.
(3) If the tribunal does so, it shall specify in its award the issue, or the claim or part of a claim, that is the
subject-matter of the award.
9. 24
Other modern arbitration laws contain similar provisions. Although the Model Law itself does not otherwise expressly refer to
partial awards, it is clear from the context in which the expression ‘final award’ is used, and from the travaux preparatoires,
that the draftsmen intended that the arbitral tribunal should have such a power. 35  However, if there is no express or implied
provision for an arbitral tribunal to make a partial award—either in the arbitration agreement, the applicable arbitration rules,
or the applicable law—it is doubtful that the tribunal has power to do so. 36  It is usually apparent from its content that a partial
award is not the ‘last’ award; nevertheless, the award should state clearly that it is a partial award. As mentioned earlier, 37
the issuance of a final award renders the arbitral tribunal functus officio, except for the purpose of correcting minor or clerical
errors. It is important not to allow either party an opportunity to claim that the arbitral tribunal has no further jurisdiction on the
grounds that it has issued a final award, when it intended to issue only a partial award. 38
9. 25
The main disadvantage of a partial award is that it opens the way for a challenge, which in turn would lead to delay, since
the relevant court would then become involved in dealing with an application by one of the parties to annul (or set aside) the
partial award, or to confirm it. 39  As noted above, the Model Law limits the potential for delay by specifying that an application
to review a partial award on jurisdiction must be lodged within thirty days of receipt of notice of the ruling, with no appeal
beyond the first level of court in which the decision is made. 40  As also noted above, the relevant decision need not have the
title ‘award’ to be subject to judicial review or confirmation. 41
(i) Issues concerning the applicable law
9. 26
An example of a situation in which a partial award is likely to prove useful is where there is a dispute between the parties as
to the law(s) applicable to the merits of the case. If this is not resolved at an early stage, the parties must argue their respective
cases by reference to different systems of law. They may even need to introduce evidence from lawyers experienced in each
of these different systems. In such circumstances, it may be sensible for the arbitral tribunal to issue a preliminary decision
on the question of the applicable law (although in the authors’ experience such disputes are rare in practice).
(ii) Separation of issues (jurisdiction, liability, quantum)
9. 27
A further example of the type of case in which it may be convenient to issue a partial award is where issues of liability may be
separated from those of quantum, which is often worth doing if it is possible to disentangle these issues. Most obviously, the
determination of a particular issue of liability in favour of the respondent may make it unnecessary for the arbitral tribunal
to investigate questions of quantum. 42  Even if it is not determinative, a decision by an arbitral tribunal on certain issues of

Section B. - Categories of Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638660 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
principle in a dispute may well encourage the parties to reach a settlement on quantum. They are usually well aware of the
costs likely to be involved if the arbitral tribunal itself has to go into the detailed quantification of a claim—a process that
often involves taking evidence from accountants, technical experts, and others.
9. 28
However, there are real dangers in attempting to isolate determinative issues at an early stage of the proceedings. The nature
of the dispute and the way in which the parties present their cases may change during the course of the proceedings, and it is
not unknown for parties to amend their cases radically in order to take advantage of a preliminary award on liability. Where
this happens, savings of time and cost will not be achieved, and the result will be the opposite of that intended. Moreover, the
process of rendering a preliminary award can itself be a time-consuming and expensive one. It is suggested that an arbitral
tribunal should not normally decide to issue a partial award on its own initiative, 43  but should do so only following a request
by one of the parties. Where both parties agree that a partial award should be made, the arbitral tribunal must follow the
agreement of the parties. Where only one party requests a partial award, a tribunal with the power to make such an award
should reach its decision as to whether or not to comply with the request only after receiving the submissions of both parties
and giving each party a reasonable opportunity to explain its position.
(iii) Limitation and exclusion clauses in a contract
9. 29
Major commercial contracts—for example for the supply of a process plant or for a construction project—often contain a
clause that limits, or purports to limit, the type or amount of damages payable in the event of breach. A typical example is
a clause providing that in no event will loss of profits be payable. There may be occasions on which a partial award on the
meaning and effect of such clauses will help to define the amount of the claim, and may make the prospect of settlement
more likely.
(b) Foreign and domestic awards
9. 30
The distinction between foreign and domestic awards is especially significant in the context of challenging and enforcement
of awards in national courts, which is addressed in Chapter 10. In India, the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 defines a
‘foreign award’, inter alia, as an award that arises out of an arbitration agreement to which the New York Convention applies,
and which is issued in a territory (other than India). 44  Conversely, the Indian Supreme Court has held that the term domestic
award means an award made in India whether or not this is in a purely domestic context; thus the definition will include a
‘domestically rendered’ award in a domestic arbitration or in an international arbitration. The distinction is significant in India
because, inter alia, domestic awards are generally subject to a higher degree of judicial scrutiny than foreign awards at the
enforcement stage. 45
(c) Default awards
9. 31
Occasionally, international arbitrations are commenced in which one party (usually the respondent) fails or refuses to take part.
This failure or refusal may be complete—that is, it occurs from the outset of the proceedings—or it may happen during the
proceedings as a result of a change of mind or strategy. The arbitral tribunal is compelled to take a more proactive role in these
circumstances, making its task more difficult. The task of an arbitral tribunal is not to ‘rubber stamp’ claims that are presented to
it; rather, it must make a determination of these claims, so the tribunal must take upon itself the burden of testing the assertions
made by the active party, and it must call for such evidence and legal argument as it may require for this purpose. 46

Section B. - Categories of Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638660 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
9. 32
If the arbitral tribunal makes an award in favour of the active party in the proceedings, it will wish to ensure that the award is
effective. To this end, it should ensure, in particular, that the award recites in considerable detail the procedure followed by the
arbitral tribunal and the efforts made by the arbitral tribunal to communicate the active party’s case to the defaulting party, so as
to give that party every opportunity to present its own arguments and evidence. Further, the motivation, or reasons, given in the
award should (without necessarily being lengthy) reflect the fact that the arbitral tribunal has genuinely addressed the merits of
the case, in order to show that a reasoned determination has been made.
9. 33
The award should also deal with any questions of jurisdiction that appear to the arbitral tribunal to be relevant, whether or not
such issues have been raised by one or other of the parties. In this context, the Arbitration Rules of the International Centre for
the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), which contain detailed provisions for default proceedings, expressly stipulate,
at Rule 42.4, that ‘[t] he Tribunal shall examine the jurisdiction of the Centre and its own competence in the dispute and, if
it is satisfied, decide whether the submissions made are well-founded in fact and in law’. If the arbitral tribunal follows these
guidelines, there is less risk of the money spent by the active party in obtaining the award being wasted as a result of a subsequent
decision by national courts that the award is unenforceable.
(d) Additional awards
9. 34
When the tribunal renders an award that does not address all of the issues presented, the parties may, within a limited time frame,
request an additional award to remedy this gap. Many arbitration rules expressly provide for additional awards, 47  and even
where they are not expressly provided for, there is generally a procedural tool by which they can, in essence, be accomplished. 48
(e) Consent awards and termination of proceedings without an award
9. 35
As in litigation in national courts, parties to an international arbitration often arrive at a settlement during the proceedings.
Where this occurs, the parties may simply implement the settlement agreement and thus revoke the mandate of the arbitral
tribunal. This means that the jurisdiction and powers conferred on the arbitral tribunal by the parties are terminated. 49
9. 36
In many cases, however, the parties find it desirable for the terms of settlement to be embodied in an award. There are many
reasons for this. The most important is that it is usually easier for a party to enforce performance by the other party of a future
obligation if that obligation is contained in an award (in respect of which the assistance of the New York Convention may be
available), rather than to take further steps to enforce a settlement agreement. 50  Other reasons for obtaining a consent award
include the desirability (particularly where a state or state agency is involved) of having a definite and identifiable ‘result’ of
the arbitral proceedings, in the form of an award, which may be passed to the appropriate paying authority for implementation.
In this context, the signatures of the arbitrators on the consent award indicate a measure of approval by the arbitral tribunal to
the agreement reached by the parties. This may help to meet politically motivated criticism of those responsible for taking the
decision to reach a compromise settlement.
9. 37
There should be little or no problem as far as capacity to compromise is concerned. Many countries adopt as their definition
of matters that are capable of resolution by arbitration (that is, matters that are ‘arbitrable’) the concept that parties may refer
to arbitration any disputes in respect of which they are entitled to reach a compromise. The reverse holds good: if parties are
entitled to refer a dispute to arbitration, they are entitled to reach a compromise in respect of that dispute.

Section B. - Categories of Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638660 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
9. 38
No restrictions are imposed by national law, or international or institutional rules of arbitration, to the effect that, once arbitral
proceedings have been commenced, the parties cannot terminate them by agreement. On the contrary, a settlement is invariably
welcomed, and it may be possible to have it recorded in a consent award. Article 30 of the Model Law provides for ‘an arbitral
award on agreed terms.’ Article 36.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules provides for a settlement to be recorded by an order or by an
award:
If, before the award is made, the parties agree on a settlement of the dispute, the arbitral tribunal shall either
issue an order for the termination of the arbitral proceedings or, if requested by the parties and accepted by
the tribunal, record the settlement in the form of an arbitral award on agreed terms. The arbitral tribunal is
not obliged to give reasons for such an award.
The ICC Rules contain a similar provision, at Article 33: if the parties reach a settlement, after the file has been transmitted
to the arbitral tribunal in accordance with Article 13, then ‘the settlement shall be recorded in the form of an award made by
consent of the parties, if so requested by the parties and if the arbitral tribunal agrees to do so’. 51  The word ‘shall’ is mandatory
and suggests an obligation to record any settlement in a consent award. However, it is qualified by the requirements that the
parties must request such an award and the tribunal must agree to it. Similarly, the LCIA Rules provide that, in the event of
any final settlement, the tribunal ‘may decide’ to make an award recording the settlement if the parties jointly so request. 52
This indicates that, under the UNCITRAL, LCIA, and ICC Rules, there is no obligation for either the parties or the tribunal
to make a consent award.
9. 39
Under whatever rules the parties are proceeding, however, it would be a normal act of courtesy to inform the arbitral tribunal
(and the appropriate arbitral institution, if one is involved) of any settlement agreement reached between the parties, particularly
if meetings or hearings have already been held. There may also be sound financial reasons for doing what normal courtesy
demands. First, notifying the arbitral tribunal of a settlement will ensure that it does not incur further fees and expenses (other
than any cancellation fees that may have been agreed). Secondly, such notification might lead to a refund of advance payments
made to cover fees and expenses, since the actual costs incurred may well be less than expected if the case has been settled
without a hearing. Thirdly, as already indicated, it may be desirable to put the terms of settlement into an enforceable form
when there is an element of future performance. Although most settlements involve immediate implementation of the agreed
terms, it is nevertheless not unusual for there to be provision for payment by instalments, or for some future transaction between
the parties to be carried out.
9. 40
A question occasionally arises as to the role of an arbitral tribunal that is requested by the parties to make a consent award
ordering the performance of an unlawful act. Examples might be the manufacture of an internationally banned drug, or the
smuggling of contraband or—perhaps more realistically—an agreement that manifestly contravenes relevant competition or
antitrust laws. At one time, various sets of rules (including the ICC Rules prior to 1998) seemed to leave the tribunal with no
discretion, but modern rules and legislation permit the arbitral tribunal to refuse to make a consent award. 53
Footnotes
27
See, e.g., UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 34.2.
28
See the discussion of enforceability of partial awards in the United States in von Mehren, ‘The enforcement of arbitral
awards under conventions and United States law’ (1985) 9 Yale Journal of World Public Order 343, at 362. The approach
of the case that von Mehren cites, Sperry International Trade, Inc. v Government of Israel, 532 F.Supp. 901 (SDNY
1982), continues to be followed for its proposition that partial awards disposing of issues separable from those that
continue to be disputed are final for the purposes of judicial review and enforcement: ‘The New York Convention, the

Section B. - Categories of Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638660 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
United Nations arbitration rules, and the commentators’ consistent use of the label ‘award’ when discussing final arbitral
decisions does not bestow transcendental significance on the term. Their treatment of ‘award’ as interchangeable with
final does not necessarily mean that synonyms such as decision, opinion, order, or ruling could not also be final. The
content of a decision—not its nomenclature—determines finality.’
29
SIAC Rules, r. 29; LCIA Rules, Art. 22.viii; ICSID Rules, r. 41.5.
30
See, e.g., UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 26 (‘Interim measures’).
31
ICC Rules, Art. 2.v.
32
For further discussion of partial awards in ICC arbitrations, see ICC, Final Report on Interim and Partial Awards of a
Working Party of the ICC’s Commission on International Arbitration (1990) 2 ICC International Court of Arbitration
Bulletin 26, at 30, in particular the discussion about terminology. The term ‘interlocutory award’ should never be used,
because it leads to confusion with procedural directions, which are not given in the form of an award.
33
LCIA Rules, Art. 26.1.
34
SIAC Rules, r. 32.5.
35
Model Law, Art. 32(1). See Holtzmann and Neuhaus, A Guide to the UNCITRAL Model Law on International
Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law, 1989), p. 868. The Model Law, Ch. IVA, does, however, expressly refer to interim
measures and preliminary orders.
36
It was perhaps to avoid uncertainty in this respect that some jurisdictions amended the Model Law to provide specifically
so that the arbitral tribunal may make a partial award on any matter on which it may make a final award: see, e.g., the
British Columbia International Commercial Arbitration Act, s. 31(6).
37
See paragraph 9.19.
38
In a 2017 case, the VSC held that an award labelled ‘Final Award’ was not final, since it did not address all the issues
that had been submitted to the arbitrator. Consequently, the arbitrator was not functus officio and it was open to either
party to apply to continue the arbitration and seek a determination of the outstanding issues (Blanalko Pty Ltd v Lysaght
Building Solutions Pty Ltd [2017] VSC 97 (10 March 2017)).
39
In the United States, a partial award for the payment of freight was ‘confirmed’ by a court while there were still
outstanding matters in dispute in the arbitration: Metallgesellschaft AG v M/V Capitan Constante and Yacimientos
Petroliferos Fiscales, 790 F.2d 280 (2d Cir. 1986). The majority judgment lists cases endorsing the ‘proposition that
an award which finally and definitely disposes of a separate independent claim may be confirmed although it does not
dispose of all the claims that were submitted to arbitration’: ibid., at [3]. However, the dissent of Feinberg CJ noted the
dangers of piecemeal review of arbitral awards. Since then, US courts of appeal in several circuits have held that a partial
award disposing definitively of fewer than all of the issues lying before the arbitral tribunal may be confirmed: see, e.g.,
Zeiler v Deitsch, 500 F.3d 157, 168 (2d Cir. 2007); Hart Surgical, Inc. v Ultracision Inc., 244 F.3d 231 (1st Cir. 2001);
Publicis Communication v True North Communications Inc., 206 F.3d 725, 727 (7th Cir. 2000); Pacific Reinsurance
Management Corp. v Ohio Reinsurance Corp., 935 F.2d 1019, 1022–23 (9th Cir. 1991). This approach has not, however,
been consistently applied in all circuits (Quixtar Inc. v Brady, Nos. 08-14346, 08-14347, 2008 WL 5386774, at *13–
14 (E.D. Mich. 17 December 2008), aff’d sub nom. Quixtar, Inc. v Brady, 328 F. App’x 317, 322–23 (6th Cir. 2009)
(refusing judicial review of a partial award disposing of the issue of arbitrability).
40
Model Law, Art. 16(3).
41
See paragraphs 9.09–9.14.
42
See Chapter 6, paragraphs 6.53 to 6.58.
43
Except in relation to issues of jurisdiction, where the respondent has not raised them, or has elected not to participate,
as in Liberian Eastern Timber Corporation v Government of the Republic of Liberia (1987) 26 ILM 647, in which the
government nominated one of the authors as an arbitrator, but then refused to take part in the proceedings, and the arbitral
tribunal examined its jurisdiction—as required by the ICSID Rules, r. 42(4)—and issued a partial award.
44
Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996, s. 53 provides a similar definition of ‘foreign award’ in relation to the
Geneva Protocol of 1923.
45
Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996, s. 34 sets out wider grounds for refusal of enforcement of a domestic
award than those available in respect of a foreign award under s. 48. Brazil follows a similar, territorial approach to
determining the nationality of an award (see Brazil Arbitration Act, art. 34, pursuant to which an arbitral award is
domestic if rendered within the Brazilian territory and foreign if rendered outside the Brazilian territory).
46
For a discussion of the procedure to be followed where one party fails or refuses to participate in an arbitration, see
Chapter 6, paragraphs 6.204–6.205.
47
See UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 39; LCIA Rules, Art. 27; International Dispute Resolution Procedures (International
Arbitration), Art. 36; SCC Rules, Art. 48; English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 57(3)(b); Model Law, Art. 33(1)(b).
48
See, e.g., ICSID Rules, r. 49.2.

Section B. - Categories of Award, UKBC-REDFERN 530638660 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
49
This follows from the consensual nature of arbitration: see Chapter 5, paragraph 5.32.
50
See, e.g., English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 51(3) (which provides that an ‘agreed award’ shall ‘have the same status and
effect as any other award on the merits of the case’).
51
Emphasis added.
52
LCIA Rules, Art. 26.9.
53
See, e.g., ICC Rules, Art. 33.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
