Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations, UKBC-REDFERN 530638613 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 2 - Agreement to Arbitrate
Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations
(a) Introduction
2. 234
When several parties are involved in a dispute, it is usually considered desirable that the issues should be dealt with in the same
proceedings, rather than in a series of separate proceedings. In general terms, this saves time and money. More importantly, it
avoids the possibility of conflicting decisions on the same issues of law and fact, since all issues are determined by the same
tribunal at the same time. In national courts, it is generally possible to join additional parties, or to consolidate separate sets
of proceedings. In arbitration, however, it is difficult, and sometimes impossible, to achieve this, because the arbitral process
is based upon the agreement of the parties. As a working group of the ICC’s Commission on International Arbitration noted
in its Final Report on Multi-party Arbitrations:
The difficulties of multi-party arbitrations all result from a single cause. Arbitration has a contractual basis; only
the common will of the contracting parties can entitle a person to bring a proceeding before an arbitral tribunal
against another person and oblige that other person to appear before it. The greater the number of such persons,
the greater the degree of care which should be taken to ensure that none of them is joined in the proceeding against
its will. 379
2. 235
Where there is a multiparty arbitration, it may be because there are several parties to one contract, or it may be because there are
several contracts with different parties that have a bearing on the matters in dispute. It is helpful to distinguish between the two.
(i) Several parties to one contract
2. 236
It is increasingly common—particularly in international trade and commerce—for individuals, corporations, or state agencies
to join together in a joint venture, or consortium, or in some other legal relationship of this kind, in order to enter into a
contract with another party or parties. Where such a contract contains an arbitration clause and a dispute arises, the members
of the consortium or joint venture may decide that they would each like to appoint an arbitrator. This is what happened in
Dutco. 380  Dutco had entered into a contract with a consortium of two German companies and, when disputes arose, brought
arbitral proceedings under the ICC Rules against those two companies. Each of the companies claimed to be entitled to
appoint an arbitrator. This created problems, because the ICC Rules do not contemplate an arbitral tribunal of more than three
arbitrators. 381  The ICC requested the two German companies to make a joint nomination of an arbitrator. They did so, but
reserved their right to challenge the ICC’s decision, which they regarded as depriving each of them of the right to nominate
an arbitrator. The French Court of Cassation agreed with the German companies: the court regarded the principle of equality
in the appointment of arbitrators as a matter of public policy.
2. 237
Many arbitration rules now make express provision for arbitration proceedings arising under multiparty contracts, so as to
avoid the Dutco dilemma. For example, Article 12.6 of the ICC Rules states:

Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations, UKBC-REDFERN 530638613 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
[ … ]
Where there are multiple claimants or multiple respondents, and where the dispute is to be referred to three
arbitrators, the multiple claimants, jointly, and the multiple respondents, jointly, shall nominate an arbitrator
for confirmation
[ … ]
In the absence of a joint nomination [ … ] and where all parties are unable to agree to a method for the
constitution of the arbitral tribunal, the Court may appoint each member of the arbitral tribunal and shall
designate one of them to act as president. [ … ]
2. 238
Article 8 of the LCIA Rules adopts a similar procedure:
 
8.1Where the Arbitration Agreement entitles each party howsoever to nominate an arbitrator, the parties to the dispute
number more than two and such parties have not all agreed in writing that the disputant parties represent collectively
two separate ‘sides’ for the formation of the Arbitral Tribunal (as Claimants on one side and Respondents on the other
side, each side nominating a single arbitrator), the LCIA Court shall appoint the Arbitral Tribunal without regard to any
party’s entitlement or nomination.
 
8.2In such circumstances, the Arbitration Agreement shall be treated for all purposes as a written agreement by the
parties for the nomination and appointment of the Arbitral Tribunal by the LCIA Court alone.
These and other arbitration rules 382  recognise the right of the parties to nominate a member of the arbitral tribunal if they
are able to agree, but takes this right away from all parties equally and vests it in the institution if they cannot do so. This is
a sensible solution to the problem of constituting an arbitral tribunal where there are three or more parties who are unable to
agree amongst themselves. However, there may be difficulties when it comes to obtaining recognition and enforcement of
an award made by a tribunal that has been established for the parties, rather than by the parties. The New York Convention,
in Article V(1)(d), states that recognition and enforcement of an award may be refused on proof that ‘[t]he composition
of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of the parties, or, failing such
agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the country where the arbitration took place’. The Model Law contains
a similar provision. 383
2. 239
However, if a losing party in an arbitration were to ask the competent court to refuse recognition or enforcement of an award
on these grounds, the party seeking enforcement would argue with force that the composition of the arbitral tribunal was in
accordance with the agreement of the parties, since, by adopting the institutional rules, they had agreed, inter alia, to this
particular provision.
2. 240
As noted above, many arbitration rules now make express provisions for the joinder of third parties to an arbitration. 384
Some of these rules specify that joinder must be requested before the constitution of the tribunal, in order to protect the new
party’s right to nominate an arbitrator. 385  Other rules allow the tribunal, having been constituted, to determine the issue of
joinder, taking into account whether a joinder in these circumstances will result in any prejudice to the new party. 386
(ii) Several contracts with different parties
2. 241
A different problem arises where there are several contracts with different parties, each of which has a bearing on the issues
in dispute. Again, this is a situation that is not uncommon in modern international trade and commerce. A major international

Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations, UKBC-REDFERN 530638613 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
construction project is likely to involve not only the employer and the main contractor (which itself may be a consortium
of companies), but also a host of specialised suppliers and subcontractors. Each of these parties will be operating under a
different contract, often with different choice-of-law and arbitration clauses—and yet any dispute between, say, the employer
and the main contractor is likely to involve one or more of the suppliers or subcontractors. 387
2. 242
What happens when a dispute between the employer and the main contractor is referred to arbitration, and the main contractor
wishes to join the subcontractor in the proceedings, on the basis that if there is any liability, it is a liability that the main
contractor is entitled to pass on to the subcontractor? This was the issue raised in the Adgas case. 388  Adgas 389  was the owner
of a plant that produced liquefied natural gas in the Arabian Gulf. The company started an arbitration in England against the
main contractors under an international construction contract, alleging that one of the huge tanks that had been constructed
to store the gas was defective. The main contractor denied liability, but added that if the tank were defective, it would be
the fault of the Japanese subcontractor. Adgas brought ad hoc arbitration proceedings against the main contractor before a
sole arbitrator in London. The main contractor then brought separate arbitration proceedings, also in London, against the
Japanese subcontractor.
2. 243
There is little doubt that if the matter had been litigated in an English court, the Japanese company would have been joined as
a party to the action. However, Adgas did not agree that the Japanese subcontractor should be brought into its arbitration with
the main contractor, since this would have lengthened and complicated the proceedings, 390  nor did the Japanese subcontractor
agree to be joined. It preferred to await the outcome of the main arbitration, to see whether or not there was a case to answer.
2. 244
Lord Denning, giving judgment in the English Court of Appeal, plainly wished that an order could be made consolidating
the two sets of arbitral proceedings, so as to save time and money and to avoid the risk of inconsistent awards:
As we have often pointed out, there is a danger in having two separate arbitrations in a case like this. You might
get inconsistent findings if there were two separate arbitrators. This has been said in many cases [ … ] it is
most undesirable that there should be inconsistent findings by two separate arbitrators on virtually the self-same
question, such as causation. It is very desirable that everything should be done to avoid such a circumstance. 391
The Court recognised that it was powerless to order consolidation without the consent of all parties:
There is no power in this court or any other court to do more upon an application such as this than to appoint
an arbitrator or arbitrators, as the case may be; we have no powers to attach conditions to that appointment,
and certainly no power to inform or direct an arbitrator as to how he should thereafter conduct the arbitration
or arbitrations. 392
2. 245
However, the Court was able to go some way towards meeting the problem of conflicting decisions. The case had come
before the Court on an application for the appointment of an arbitrator, and the Court decided that it could appoint the same
arbitrator in each case, if that arbitrator was ready to accept the appointment (as indeed he was). Lord Denning said: ‘It seems
to me that there is ample power in the court to appoint in each arbitration the same arbitrator. It seems to me highly desirable
that this should be done so as to avoid inconsistent findings.’ 393  This was one practical solution to the problem of conflicting
decisions—but it still meant that there would be two separate arbitrations arising out of the same dispute.
(b) Court-ordered consolidation
2. 246

Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations, UKBC-REDFERN 530638613 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
A different solution that has been adopted in different parts of the world has been to enact legislation that enables the relevant
national court to order consolidation of arbitrations. 394  In the Netherlands, for example, under the 1986 Arbitration Act, the
president of the District Court in Amsterdam may order the whole or partial consolidation of two or more connected arbitrations
in the Netherlands, unless the parties agree otherwise. 395  Some provinces of Canada also allow for court-ordered consolidation
of connected proceedings. 396
2. 247
There is no provision in the Model Law for the consolidation of arbitrations, but nevertheless several states that have adopted
it have added a provision providing for court-ordered consolidation. In any given case, it is necessary to consider the relevant
legislation of the state concerned to see exactly what provision is made, but two examples illustrate what might be expected.
Under the Hong Kong Arbitration Ordinance, the court may consolidate proceedings or order them to be heard concurrently
or consecutively if: (a) a common question of law or fact arises in both proceedings; (b) the disputes arise out of the same
transaction or series of transactions; or (c) the court considers it desirable to do so for any other reason. 397  In California, the
court may order consolidation on such terms as it considers just and necessary. If the parties cannot agree upon the arbitrators,
the court will appoint them. The court will also determine any other matters on which the parties cannot agree and which are
necessary for the conduct of the arbitration. 398
2. 248
At first sight, court-ordered consolidation seems to be a powerful solution to the problem of ensuring consistent decisions, when
the same or similar issues of law and fact would otherwise come before different arbitral tribunals. There are, however, likely
to be practical and legal problems. The different arbitration agreements may differ in their provisions as to number and method
of appointment of arbitrators, as to the relevant rules of arbitration, as to the power to issue interim awards, and so on. They
may also differ as to the law governing the merits of the dispute. 399  Finally, there may be a problem in obtaining recognition
and enforcement for such awards. Reference has already been made to the requirement of Article V(1)(d) of the New York
Convention to the effect that the composition of the arbitral authority, and the arbitral procedure, must be in accordance with
the agreement of the parties. Where an arbitral tribunal that has been imposed upon the parties makes an award, it may be
argued that the award should be refused recognition and enforcement under this provision of the Convention. 400  There is strong
support, however, for the view that where a court has ordered a consolidated arbitration, the award will be enforceable under
the New York Convention provided that the parties have at least agreed to arbitration and to the same arbitral jurisdiction. 401
(c) Consolidation by consent
(i) Under an arbitration agreement
2. 249
The ICC Commission on International Arbitration’s Final Report on Multi-party Arbitrations stated that, ‘[i]n a multilateral
relationship, whether involving a single contract or separate related contracts, it may be appropriate or necessary to have a
multi-party arbitration clause’. 402
2. 250
Drafting such a clause is not easy. It requires a close understanding of the nature of the relationship between the different
parties and of the type of disputes that may conceivably arise, and it calls for careful and detailed drafting. It is miles away
from the standard, or model, form of arbitration clause under which most arbitrations are conducted. The report includes as
an annexe examples of multiparty arbitration agreements that have been drawn from various sources. 403

Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations, UKBC-REDFERN 530638613 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
(ii) Under institutional rules
2. 251
Neither the Model Law nor the UNCITRAL Rules contain any provision for the consolidation of different arbitrations.
However, modern sets of institutional rules have developed useful pre-fabricated provisions. Under Article 10 of the ICC
Rules, the ICC Court may, at the request of a party, consolidate two or more pending arbitrations where: (a) the parties
agree; (b) all claims are made under the same arbitration agreement; or (c) in the case of claims under multiple contracts,
the arbitrations are between the same parties, the disputes arise in connection with the same legal relationship, and the Court
considers that the terms of the arbitration agreements are compatible.
2. 252
Article 22A of the LCIA Rules provides that an arbitral tribunal may order the consolidation of arbitrations where either (a)
all parties to the arbitrations to be consolidated so agree in writing; or (b) the arbitrations to be consolidated were commenced
under the same arbitration agreement or compatible arbitration agreements, provided that those arbitrations are between the
same parties or arise out of the same transaction or series of related transactions. 404
2. 253
Article 4.1 of the Swiss Rules allows for consolidation in the following circumstances:
Where a Notice of Arbitration is submitted between parties already involved in other arbitral proceedings
pending under these Rules, the Court may decide, after consulting with the parties and any confirmed arbitrator
in all proceedings, that the new case shall be consolidated with the pending arbitral proceedings. The Court
may proceed in the same way where a Notice of Arbitration is submitted between parties that are not identical
to the parties in the pending arbitral proceedings. When rendering its decision, the Court shall take into account
all relevant circumstances, including the links between the cases and the progress already made in the pending
arbitral proceedings. Where the Court decides to consolidate the new case with the pending arbitral proceedings,
the parties to all proceedings shall be deemed to have waived their right to designate an arbitrator, and the Court
may revoke the appointment and confirmation of arbitrators and apply the provisions of Section II (Composition
of the Arbitral Tribunal). 405
2. 254
In an appropriate case, provisions such as these should prove useful in bringing everyone concerned before the same arbitral
tribunal. However, the procedure to be followed in the conduct of such a consolidated arbitration would again have to be
carefully worked out, so as to ensure that each party is given a proper opportunity to present its case. Otherwise, any resulting
award may be refused recognition or enforcement. 406
(d) Concurrent hearings
2. 255
Another practical solution to the problem created by multiparty disputes that are not subject to joinder, consolidation, or class
arbitration, is to appoint the same arbitrator to more than one arbitration. If this is to be done, the procedures to be followed
need to be considered carefully. Provision should be made for whether, and to what extent, there is confidentiality across the
formally different proceedings, 407  and whether the record (and even the transcript of witness testimony) can be used across
different proceedings. Such de facto consolidation would depend upon the agreement of all of the parties concerned and, once
again, appropriate procedural rules would have to be worked out.

Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations, UKBC-REDFERN 530638613 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
(e) Class arbitrations
2. 256
A ‘class’, or ‘representative’, action is a legal proceeding that enables the claims of a number of persons with the same
interest (the ‘class members’) to be brought by one or a number of claimants (the ‘representative claimant(s)’) against the same
respondent. In a class action, only the representative claimant(s) is a party to the action, and although the class members do not
take an active part in the proceedings, they are bound by the outcome.
2. 257
Although, for many years, class actions were peculiar to the US litigation landscape, variations on the theme have since appeared
in other legal systems. 408  Perhaps more surprisingly, class actions have begun to make an appearance in international arbitration.
‘Surprisingly’ because one might take the view that a representative action is anathema to the principles of privity and party
autonomy that tend to lead to the classic constellation of claimants facing respondents in the same proceedings who are party
to the same contract. But US courts, no doubt more comfortable with the concept of class actions than other courts around the
world, have seen no reason why class action cannot be exported to international arbitration.
2. 258
Thus, in the US Supreme Court’s 2003 landmark decision in Green Tree Financial Corporation v Bazzle, 409  the plurality of a
divided Supreme Court opened the door to class-wide arbitrations. The case involved a lender who had entered into standard-
form contracts for home improvement loans with a number of borrowers. As is typical in contracts of this type, the contracts
contained an arbitration clause, referring all disputes to ‘binding arbitration by one arbitrator selected by us [the lender] with
the consent of you’. The matter was commenced by two sets of consumers, who first brought two separate lawsuits before state
courts challenging the lender’s practices. Both lawsuits were referred to arbitration at the lender’s demand, and in both cases
the sole arbitrator (who was, in fact, the same individual in both cases) administered the cases as class-wide arbitrations and
issued class awards in favour of the borrowers. 410
2. 259
The lender challenged the award, submitting that, in ‘selecting an’ arbitrator that was ‘consented to by’ one of its customers
as required by the express terms of the arbitration agreement, it was not selecting an arbitrator to determine its dispute with its
other customers. On this basis, it argued that the terms of the arbitration agreement did not accommodate, but rather forbade,
class-wide arbitration.
2. 260
The South Carolina Supreme Court upheld the class awards, reasoning that there was nothing in either the contracts or the Federal
Arbitration Act to preclude class-wide arbitration. Unable to arrive at a majority opinion, the US Supreme Court nevertheless
affirmed the judgment and found in the process that an arbitrator, rather than a court, must determine whether the contracts
forbid class arbitration.
2. 261
The response to Green Tree in the United States was immediate. Many companies—particularly in consumer businesses—
modified their standard arbitration clauses to add an express prohibition on class-wide proceedings. This led to another wave
of litigation, challenging the enforceability of such class-action waivers. The Californian courts, for instance, have consistently
refused to give effect to waivers contained in consumer contracts on the basis that they are unconscionable. 411
2. 262
In 2003, US arbitral institutions promulgated new rules that deal with class-action scenarios. The AAA promulgated
Supplementary Rules for Class Actions, which:
 
• require the arbitrator first to decide whether a class action is permissible under the contract in question and applicable
state law;
 
• provide guidance for the arbitrator thereafter in determining whether to ‘certify’ the existence of a class; 412  and

Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations, UKBC-REDFERN 530638613 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
 
• in particular, require the arbitrator to set forth his or her ruling on the class-action issues in a ‘class construction award’
that may itself be enforced or set aside in court. 413
2. 263
As for the courts, until recently there appeared to be a discernible trend towards allowing class treatment of issues that
were arbitrable under most standard arbitration clauses, at least where the clause did not explicitly prohibit or restrict
class treatment. 414  However, the tide changed following the Supreme Court’s decision in Stolt-Nielsen SA v Animalfeeds
International Corporation. 415  The Court overturned an arbitral award that determined issues on a class basis on the ground
that the tribunal had exceeded its powers, stating that:
An implicit agreement to authorize class-action arbitration [ … ] is not a term that the arbitrator may infer solely
from the fact of the parties’ agreement to arbitrate. This is so because class-action arbitration changes the nature
of arbitration to such a degree that it cannot be presumed the parties consented to it by simply agreeing to submit
their disputes to an arbitrator. 416
2. 264
The Court noted that a shift from an ordinary bilateral or multilateral arbitration to a class- action arbitration involved
‘fundamental changes’, including a larger number of parties, lack of privacy and confidentiality, the adjudication of rights of
absent parties, and the potential for high-value awards that were subject to only minimal judicial review on the merits. It stated
that tribunals should therefore not presume that the parties’ mere silence on the issue of class arbitration constitutes consent. 417
2. 265
The recent case of Lamps Plus v Varela 418  appears—at least for now—to have removed any doubt in the matter. In proceedings
before the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, an employee had successfully argued that an arbitration clause, which was
ambiguous as to whether the employee could bring a class arbitration against his employer, should be read contra proferentum
and was thus enforceable. 419  The Supreme Court, however, appears to have taken its previous findings in the case of Stolt-
Nielsen a step further. It considered ‘whether, consistent with the [Federal Arbitration Act], an ambiguous agreement can provide
the necessary “contractual basis” for compelling class arbitration’, and concluded that it cannot. In the Court’s view, the Federal
Arbitration Act requires ‘more than ambiguity to ensure that the parties actually agreed to arbitrate on a classwide basis’. 420
2. 266
After much debate, the related question of the validity of class arbitration waivers has also reached the US Supreme Court. In
AT&T Mobility LLC v Concepcion, 421  it was held that such provisions are enforceable. The Court noted the ‘liberal federal
policy favouring arbitration’, and held that arbitration agreements should be placed on an equal footing with other contracts and
enforced according to their terms. Most recently, the Supreme Court affirmed in Epic Systems Corp v Lewis that ‘one-on-one’
mandatory arbitration agreements imposed by employers upon their employees are enforceable. 422
2. 267
Until recently, the concept of class arbitration found little support outside the United States. 423  This may be changing. Following
a number of years of consultation, the European Union recently published the ‘Directive on representative actions for the
protection of the collective interests of Consumers’. 424  The Directive, which EU member states will have two years to
implement (from 4 December 2020) and an additional six months to apply, introduces a right of collective redress across the EU,
primarily by requiring member states to establish procedures by which ‘qualified entities’ will be able to bring representative
actions to seek injunctions, damages, and other redress on behalf of a group of consumers against a trader who has allegedly
infringed EU law. Although much depends on how the Directive is implemented by member states, there is now the prospect that
class arbitration could, in principle, be extended beyond the United States, and the resulting awards enforced internationally. 425

Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations, UKBC-REDFERN 530638613 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
Footnotes
379
Commission on International Arbitration, Final Report on Multiparty Arbitrations, Paris, June 1994, published in (1995)
6 ICC Bulletin 26 (the ‘Delvolvé Report’), para. 5. See also generally Hanotiau, Complex Arbitrations: Multiparty,
Multicontract, Multi-issue and Class Actions (Kluwer Law International, 2005). For an illustration of judicial reluctance
to order consolidation unless the agreement of all parties is express, see the US courts, e.g. in Stolt-Nielsen SA v Animal
Feeds Intern Corporation, 2008 WL 4779582 (2d Cir. 4 November 2008); Glencore Ltd v Schnitzer Steel Products, 189
F.3d 264, 265–266 (2d Cir. 1999); Champ v Siegel Trading Co. 55 F.3d.269 (7th Cir. 1995).
380
BKMI and Siemens v Dutco, French Cass. Civ. 1ere, 7 January 1992, (1992) 1 Bull Civ, (1992) 119 J du Droit Intl 707,
2nd document; commentary by Bellet [1992] Rev Arb 470, at 473–482; excerpts in (1993) XVII YBCA 140.
381
ICC Rules, Art. 12 (ex Art. 8.4).
382
See the UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 10; SIAC Rules, r. 12; Swiss Rules, Art. 8; HKIAC Rules, Art. 8.2; SCC Rules, Art. 17.5.
383
In Model Law, Art. 36(1)(a)(iv).
384
See paragraphs 2.65–2.69 above.
385
See, e.g., the ICC Rules, Art. 7, which provides that ‘unless all parties, including the additional party, otherwise agree
[ … ], no additional party may be joined after the confirmation or appointment of any arbitrator’ and that ‘any Request
for Joinder made after the confirmation or appointment of any arbitrator shall be decided by the arbitral tribunal once
constituted and shall be subject to the additional party accepting the constitution of the arbitral tribunal and agreeing
to the Terms of Reference’.
386
See, e.g., the UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 7.5, which provides that ‘the tribunal may [ … ] allow one or more persons to be
joined in the arbitration provided such person is a party to the arbitration agreement, unless the arbitral tribunal finds
[ … ] that joinder should not be permitted because of prejudice to any of those parties’.
387
Another common situation arises in connection with bank guarantees concluded in connection with the main
agreement: see Hanotiau, Complex Arbitrations: Multiparty, Multicontract, Multi-issue and Class Actions (Kluwer Law
International, 2005), pp. 129–132; Wessel and Gsell, ‘ITSA v SATCOM & BBVA: Spanish court extends an arbitration
agreement to guarantor not a party to the contract’ [2006] Intl Arb L Rev N16.
388
Abu Dhabi Gas Liquefaction Co. Ltd v Eastern Bechtel Corporation [1982] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 425 (CA), (1982) XXI ILM
1057, [1983] Rev Arb 119 (with comment by Paulsson), (1984) IX YBCA 448.
389
That is, the Abu Dhabi Gas Liquefaction Co. Ltd, which itself was owned by a consortium consisting of the Abu Dhabi
National Oil Corporation and several international corporations.
390
There was also a different choice-of-law clause in the two contracts.
391
Abu Dhabi Gas, at 427.
392
Abu Dhabi Gas, at 427 per Watkins LJ. See also Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. v Swiss Reinsurance America
Corporation 87 F.Supp.2d 300 (SDNY 2000), in which the US courts acknowledged the risk of inconsistent decisions,
but stated that this did not give courts ‘the authority to reform [ … ] private contracts’.
393
Abu Dhabi Gas, at 427.
394
See generally Hanotiau, Complex Arbitrations: Multiparty, Multicontract, Multi-issue and Class Actions (Kluwer Law
International, 2005), pp. 179–190.
395
Code of Civil Procedure 1986, Art. 1046. Proposals submitted to the Dutch parliament to amend this provision were
approved on 27 May 2014. The amended Art. 1046 contains three material differences. First, the parties may now
nominate a third party (e.g. an arbitral institution) to decide on a party’s request to consolidate arbitration proceedings.
This was a power previously held only by the president of the District Court of Amsterdam. Secondly, such a third
party’s power to consolidate is broader than that of the president (who may order consolidation only where both sets of
proceedings are in the Netherlands), in that the third party may also decide on a request to consolidate a Netherlands-
seated arbitration with an arbitration seated outside of the Netherlands. Thirdly, the requirement that the subject matter
of the arbitrations be connected has been removed.
396
See Western Oil Sands Inc. v Allianz Insurance Co. of Canada [2004] ABQB 79.
397
See the Hong Kong Arbitration Ordinance 2011, Sch. 2, s. 2. However, parties must ‘opt in’ to this provision: see also
Chun Wo Building Construction v China Merchants Tower Co. [2000] 2 HKC 255.
398
California Code of Civil Procedure, § 1297.272. For a note of other states that adopted the Model Law, but
added a provision for consolidation of arbitrations, see Sanders, ‘Arbitration’, in Cappelletti (ed.) Encyclopedia of

Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations, UKBC-REDFERN 530638613 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
International and Comparative Law, Vol. XVI (Brill, 1987), ch. 12, para. 45. See also Leboulanger, ‘Multi-contract
arbitrations’ (1996) 13 J Intl Arb 43.
399
As in Abu Dhabi Gas Liquefaction Co. Ltd v Eastern Bechtel Corporation [1982] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 425 (CA): see paragraph
2.219.
400
See Hascher, ‘Consolidation of arbitration by American courts: Fostering or hampering international commercial
arbitration?’ (1984) 1 J Intl Arb 127.
401
See van den Berg, ‘Consolidated arbitrations and the 1958 New York Arbitration Convention’ (1986) 2 Arb Intl 367;
see also Jarvin, ‘Consolidated arbitrations, the New York Arbitration Convention and the Dutch Arbitration Act 1986:
A critique of Dr van den Berg’ (1987) 3 Arb Intl 254; van den Berg, ‘A replique to Mr Jarvin’ (1987) 3 Arb Intl 259.
See also Karaha Bodas Co. v Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak 364 F.3d 274 (5th Cir. 2004); Riverstone Ins Ltd v
Liquidators of ICD, Paris cour d’appel, 5 November 2009, Case No. 08/12816.
402
Delvolvé Report, para. 113.
403
They are not, however, to be regarded as approved by the Working Group. For further guidance, see Paulsson,
Rawding, and Reed (eds) The Freshfields Guide to Arbitration Clauses in International Contracts (3rd edn, Kluwer Law
International, 2010).
404
See also the SIAC Rules, r. 8; the CIETAC Rules, Art. 19.
405
See also the Rules of the Belgian Centre for Arbitration and Mediation (CEPANI), Art. 13, which adopts a similar
approach.
406
Under the provisions of the New York Convention, Art. V1(b), or the Model Law, Art. 36(1)(a)(ii).
407
In this regard, see Aegis v European Re [2003] 1 WLR 1041; Rawding and Seeger, ‘Aegis v European Re and the
confidentiality of arbitration awards’ (2003) 19 Arb Intl 483.
408
In England, procedural rules of court now exist for collective and representative actions (see the Civil Procedure Rules,
Pt. 19). Similar procedural rules exist in Canada and have, since 2003, been introduced for the courts in Sweden, Norway,
Finland, Germany, and Italy.
409
Green Tree Financial Corporation v Bazzle, 539 US 444 (2003).
410
In one of the two cases, the court had certified it as a class action before it was removed to arbitration. In the second
case, the arbitrator certified it as a class-wide arbitration himself.
411
See, in particular, Discover Bank v Superior Court, 36 Cal. 4th 148 (2005); Thibodeau v Comcast Corporation, 2006
Pa. Super. 306 (2006).
412
In this regard, the Rules, for the most part, mirror the standards set forth in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, r. 23.
413
Of particular interest for international practitioners, as part of its rules for class arbitrations, the AAA explicitly waived
the normal policy of confidentiality.
414
See the decision of the Southern District of New York in JSC Surtneftegat v President & Fellows of Harvard College,
SDNY 04 Civ 6069, 11 October 2007.
415
Stolt-Nielsen SA v Animalfeeds International Corporation, 130 S.Ct. 1758 (2010).
416
Ibid., at 1775.
417
Ibid.
418
Lamps Plus v Varela 2019 WL 1780275 (2019).
419
Ibid.
420
Ibid.
421
AT&T Mobility LLC v Concepcion, 131 S.Ct. 1740 (2011).
422
Epic Systems Corp v Lewis, 138 S.Ct. 1612—2018. See also American Express Co. v Italian Colors Restaurant, No.
12-133, Supreme Court of the United States, 20 June 2013, in which the Supreme Court refused to carve out an exception
to this principle where the cost of pursuing separate arbitrations is prohibitively high.
423
However, see Luis Alberto Duran Valencia v Bancolombia, 24 April 2003, in which a Colombian tribunal allowed a
class arbitration to proceed in a post-acquisition dispute involving multiple shareholders.
424
Directive (EU) 2020/1828 of 25 November 2020 on representative actions for the protection of the collective interests
of consumers and repealing Directive 2009/22/EC. The Directive, which was published in the Official Journal on 4
December 2020, was preceded by public consultations on ‘collective redress’ mechanisms in EU member states, which
was launched by the European Commission and resulted in non-binding policy being published on 11 June 2013. In
2017, the Commission issued a Call for Evidence seeking evidence on how the policy was being implemented in practice.
In 2018, the Commission issued a report which concluded that, although the policy had achieved its aim of inspiring
discussions across the EU regarding collective redress, it had resulted in only limited development of new legislation,
and access to collective redress mechanisms remained unevenly distributed across the EU.

Section I. - Multiparty Arbitrations, UKBC-REDFERN 530638613 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
425
Strong, ‘Enforcing class arbitration in the international sphere: Due process and public policy concerns’ (2008) 30 U
Penn JIL 89.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
