Article 19 Rules Governing the Proceedings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407058 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 19 Rules Governing the Proceedings
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Article 19 Rules Governing the Proceedings
The proceedings before the arbitral tribunal shall be governed by the Rules and, where the Rules are silent, by any rules
which the parties or, failing them, the arbitral tribunal may settle on, whether or not reference is thereby made to the rules
of procedure of a national law to be applied to the arbitration.
19-1
Article 19 deals with the procedure for an ICC arbitration and whether or not a national law should be applied to that
procedure. 71  Article 21 in turn concerns the application of a national law to the merits of the dispute, normally including the
governing law of the contract.
19-2
By choosing arbitration, parties are opting out of national courts in favour of private dispute resolution. The parties therefore are
choosing another forum than the courts and another procedure than that applicable in the courts. When choosing ICC arbitration,
the parties submit to the ICC Rules as the framework for dispute resolution.
19-3
Quite rightly, art.19 puts the Rules in the forefront as the rules applicable to the arbitral proceedings. Only when the Rules are
silent and thus only by default, other rules will also apply to the arbitration. More specifically, in the first place, those rules the
parties will have adopted, or, in the alternative, the Tribunal will have set. In practice, it is either in the arbitration agreement,
and more often in preparation for the Terms of Reference and the case management conference, that the parties will agree on
more specific procedural rules than those resulting from the Rules. In this respect, it is standard practice for Tribunals to invite
the parties to confer as to the procedure prior to establishing the detailed procedure for the arbitration. Therefore, the basic issues
with respect to the procedure to be adopted and how they are discussed in particular at art.22 (Conduct of the arbitration), art.24
(case management conference and Procedural Timetable), art.25 (Establishing the facts of the case) and art.26 (Hearings) below.
19-4
But, if the parties cannot agree on such rules, it will have to be for the Tribunal to adopt them, generally by way of its first or
subsequent procedural order, and always after having consulted the parties. It is not infrequent that the procedural order will
expressly state that the procedural rules have been adopted “in agreement,” or at least “after having heard” the parties usually
first by email and then during the initial case management conference discussed at art.24 below. In adopting the procedural rules
for the arbitration, the Tribunal is expected to consider in particular the provisions of the 2021 ICC Note discussed at para.22-4
below, although, as discussed in the Introduction, the 2021 ICC Note is not binding as such. 72
19-5
As discussed in the Introduction, one of the basic principles of international arbitration and ICC arbitration is that there is no
code of civil procedure. 73  Within the framework of the ICC Rules and mandatory law, the parties and the Tribunal are free to
develop their own procedure. This accounts for the change that one observes with respect to international arbitration procedure
from case to case and over time.
19-6

Article 19 Rules Governing the Proceedings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407058 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
As mentioned, some of the agreed procedural rules will be set out in the Terms of Reference, although increasingly these are
left to procedural orders. In addition, the Tribunal will decide or reflect the parties’ agreement on procedural issues usually in
a procedural order or in a letter reflecting the decision itself. 74
19-7
The fact that the parties have chosen one system of law to govern the merits of their dispute does not mean that they have chosen
that system of law or any system of law in particular to govern the procedure. A Tribunal made this basic point, for example,
in ICC case No.5029 in 1986. In that case, the Tribunal was faced with the interpretation of a clause providing that the contract
was subject to Egyptian law. The Egyptian party argued that, as a result, Egyptian procedural law governed the arbitration. The
Tribunal rejected this argument stating:
“As it is recognized in virtually all legal systems around the world, a basic distinction must be made between the
law governing the substance and the law governing the procedure. That distinction is also recognized in Egyptian
conflict of laws: whereas Art.19 of the Egyptian Civil Code provides for the law governing the substance of the
dispute, Art.22 is concerned with the law governing the procedure. Accordingly, if the parties had wished that
the arbitration be governed by Egyptian procedural law, they should have made a specific agreement thereon.
Art.5(1)(b) of the Contract is not such a provision as it does not mention specifically that arbitration is governed
by Egyptian law. Failing such agreement, the arbitration law of the place governs the arbitration.” 75
19-8
Article 19 confirms the distinction between the law on the merits and the law governing the procedure as well as the autonomy
of the parties and of the Tribunal with respect to the arbitration procedure. Under the laws applicable in most major centres of
arbitration, this autonomy as to the procedure is expressly confirmed. The basic principle is that, provided that the procedure
of an ICC arbitration respects due process, the parties and the Tribunal may craft the procedure to suit the needs of the case.
19-9
Although not specifically mentioned in art.19, the arbitration agreement may set out details of the procedure. However, usually
it does not. The standard ICC arbitration clause does not contain reference to the details of the procedure.
19-10
The arbitration agreement also does not incorporate by reference the procedural rules of any country. However, some clauses
are drafted to suggest that the procedure will be that of a particular country or place. For example, the arbitration agreement
may state that “the arbitration will be conducted in accordance with the civil procedure in Geneva, Switzerland”. 76
19-11
These types of references are somewhat problematic, as ICC arbitration is generally not carried out in accordance with the
national procedure of the place of arbitration. Some parties seek to increase certainty with respect to the procedural conduct
of the arbitration by inserting a reference to the procedural law at the place of arbitration. It remains, however, often unclear
whether the reference is to the arbitration law only or the law of civil procedure in general. If reference is to the arbitration law
only, the reference is of limited assistance as most modern arbitration laws contain very few guidelines as to how to conduct
the arbitration, and leave it essentially to the discretion of the arbitrators. If the reference is to the local civil procedure, it may
also be of little assistance as domestic civil procedure is applicable in the courts and may be difficult to adapt to an arbitration,
let alone an international one. 77  Therefore, the better view is that these references to local procedure should be avoided and,
if they are present, they should be clarified in the Terms of Reference.
19-12
Article 19 confirms the precedence of an agreement between the parties as to the procedure as the procedural rules may be those
“which the parties … may settle on”. The parties may agree on procedural rules at any juncture. To the extent that the parties
agree prior to the nomination of the arbitrators, they will be in the position of presenting to the Tribunal the procedure that
should be followed. If the members of the Tribunal disagree with the proposed procedure, they should not accept the arbitration.
If the parties agree on a procedure after the Tribunal has been constituted, the Tribunal may object to the procedure, although
an agreement between the parties takes precedence under art.19.

Article 19 Rules Governing the Proceedings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407058 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
19-13
If the parties do not settle on the procedure, the Tribunal may do so itself, “whether or not reference is thereby made to the rules
of procedure of a national law”. In fact, Tribunals seldom make reference to national rules of procedure when they decide on
the procedure as there is usually no need to do so.
19-14
In some cases, it may, however, be appropriate to take into consideration or at least have some guidelines, the procedural rules
applicable in the country of the place of arbitration, in order to come up with the appropriate rule. For instance, the ICC Rules
contain no provision regarding the unilateral withdrawal of the Request for arbitration by the claimant without requiring the
respondent’s consent. Arbitration laws are generally silent regarding this question as well. However, under art.395 78  of the
French Civil Procedure Code, once a respondent has submitted an answer to the merits, the claimant can only withdraw the case
with the respondent’s consent. In an ICC arbitration, having its place of arbitration in France, a Tribunal might wish to take this
rule into consideration in deciding whether the claimant can unilaterally withdraw from the arbitration. 79
19-15
In arbitrations conducted in London, for example, counsel frequently rely on precedents from the English Rules of Civil
Procedure. If both parties are adopting this approach, it is in accordance with the principle of party autonomy for the Tribunal to
consider carefully such authority. In addition, for some English practitioners, it is preferable to have a pleading style approach
(with witness statements and expert evidence filed only after the pleadings have been completed). Again, if the parties prefer this
pleading style approach, there is no reason not to adopt it in an ICC arbitration as it has real advantages (as well as disadvantages).
19-16
Usually the Tribunal will set out its own principles for the procedure in a procedural order, an example of which is found in
Part II. The nature of these orders varies in particular with the input of the parties. Arbitration is linked to at least one national
legal system through the place of arbitration, but that does not mean it adopts the procedure of that national legal system or of
any national legal system, 80  although the mandatory provisions at the place of arbitration will prevail.
19-17
In setting out the procedure, the Tribunal may refer to the principles set out in the IBA Rules on Evidence. 81  More frequently,
Tribunals either refer to the IBA Rules on Evidence as guidelines in the Terms of Reference or in a procedural order or
acknowledge orally at the procedural hearing that the IBA Rules on Evidence or at least some of its provisions are guidelines
that will be referred to by the Tribunal in reaching its procedural decisions.
Footnotes
71
The 2021 Rules have left art.19 unchanged from the 2017 Rules.
72
Introduction, para.0-7 and following.
73
Introduction, para.0-40.
74
Such decisions may also be taken during oral hearings, and will then be recorded in the transcript, or the (summary)
minutes of the hearing, or simply in subsequent correspondence by the arbitral tribunal.
75
ICC Case No.5029 (1986) (Interim Award), (1987) YBCA Vol.XII pp.113–123; more generally, see Fouchard, Gaillard
& Goldman, op. cit., para.1171 and following, p.633; El Ahdab & Mainguy, op. cit., paras 1140–1152, pp.687–694.
76
Hascher, “The Law Governing Procedure: Express or Implied Choice by the Parties—Contractual Practice” (1996)
ICCA Congress Series No.7, p.322. Henderson, “Lex Arbitri, Procedural Law and the Seat of Arbitration” in Singapore
Academy of Law Journal (2014, 26 SAcLJ).
77
See, for instance, art.19(2) of the UNCITRAL Model Law, Pt III App.3.
78
Article 395 of French CPC: “The withdrawal will be effective only upon the acceptance of the same by the defendant.
However, the acceptance (of the defendant) will not be necessary where the defendant has not tendered any defence on
the merits of the case or a plea of non-admissibility at the time where the plaintiff has withdrawn (his action).”

Article 19 Rules Governing the Proceedings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407058 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
79
In practice this issue rarely comes up.
80
See para.18-2.
81
Pt III App.4; and the discussion at para.25-38 and following.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
