Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 4 - Establishment and Organisation of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators
(a) Introduction
4. 102
Challenges to arbitrators were, at one time, a rare event. If a vacancy occurred, it was usually because of the death or resignation
of an arbitrator. However, modern international arbitrations often involve vast sums of money and the parties have become
more inclined to engage specialist lawyers, who are expert in manoeuvres designed to obtain a tactical advantage, or at least to
minimise a potential disadvantage. 133  Statistics on arbitrator challenges are available from most of the main institutions, 134
and some commentators have concluded that the practice has increased to the extent that it might affect the efficiency and
legitimacy of the process. 135  This is particularly noteworthy in investment arbitrations. 136  In short, as the scope of international
arbitration widens, and as claims for damages or compensation frequently run into millions of dollars, parties, courts, and arbitral
institutions are facing an increasing number of challenges to arbitrators for alleged lack of independence or impartiality. 137
4. 103
Some challenges are undoubtedly meritorious. In other cases, however, challenges are made to obtain a tactical advantage, for
example, at the start of an arbitration, to hinder the formation of the tribunal; or, in the course of an arbitration, because the
party making the challenge suspects that the arbitrator who is the target of the challenge is not persuaded of the merits of the
challenging party’s case. 138  Such challenges cause delay and add to expense, since the parties, the challenged arbitrator(s), and
the other members of the tribunal will be given time to comment upon the challenges before the relevant institution or individual
makes a decision; and indeed, in some institutions the proceedings will be automatically stayed pending resolution. 139
4. 104
Traditionally, institutions have categorised decisions on challenges as administrative in nature and have not provided reasons for
their decisions. However, given the important impact such a decision will have on the arbitral process (often affecting the right
of one of the parties to have the ‘judge of their choice’), there have been ever-stronger demands for institutions to publish and
provide reasons for their decisions in order to clarify, both for arbitrators and for parties, the standards applied by the institutions
themselves, thus assisting uniformity in the practice of disclosure. This has caused institutions to abandon their traditional
reticence and publish the reasons for such decisions. In 2011, the LCIA led the way by publishing its decisions in redacted
form. 140  In 2015, the ICC changed its practice to provide reasons, if any party so requested in advance of the decision. 141  The
practice of ICSID has been to publish reasons for decisions on challenges and those decisions have become an important point
of reference when considering the scope of independence and impartiality under the ICSID Convention and rules. 142
(b) Grounds for challenge
4. 105
Before a challenge can be considered, the applicable rules need to be established. In the event of an arbitration taking place in
accordance with institutional rules, the test will be set out in those rules, with a challenge being made to the relevant institution,
or (in the case of UNCITRAL) to the appointing authority designated by the parties or, in the absence of such designation, by
the appointing authority chosen by the PCA. 143  In the event of a pure ad hoc arbitration (that is, one with no chosen set of

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
rules), the test will be set out in the local arbitration law of the seat of the arbitration. In the absence of any designated appointing
authority, a challenge will be decided by the judicial courts of the seat.
(i) Arbitral rules and the ICSID Convention
4. 106
In general, the parties may challenge an arbitrator only where they have reasonable doubts as to his or her impartiality or
independence. However, the arbitral rules provide their own tests, which may vary from each other.
4. 107
For instance, Article 12 of the UNCITRAL Rules provides:
1. Any arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to the
arbitrator’s impartiality or independence.
2. A party may challenge the arbitrator appointed by him only for reasons of which he becomes aware
after the appointment has been made. [ … ]
Commentators on the UNCITRAL Rules note that the inclusion of the word ‘justifiable’ in Article 12.1 to define the kind
of doubt required to sustain a challenge reflects UNCITRAL’s clear intention of establishing an objective standard for
impartiality and independence. 144
4. 108
The relevant case law supports this position. 145  The appointing authority in the challenge decision filed in the UNCITRAL
case Nord Stream 2 v EU noted that:
[T]he doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence must be justifiable pursuant to an analysis of
all relevant circumstances from the perspective of an objective, reasonable, and informed third party. Further,
a challenge may succeed on the basis of an appearance of bias without requiring proof of actual bias. 146
4. 109
The ICC Rules are succinct on the issue. Article 14.1 simply notes that:
A challenge of an arbitrator, whether for an alleged lack of impartiality, or independence or otherwise, shall be
made by submission to the Secretariat of a written statement specifying the facts and circumstances on which
the challenge is based. [Emphasis added]
4. 110
The breadth of this provision is striking. It would appear to grant the ICC Court considerable discretion to remove an
arbitrator. 147  However, as noted above, since 2015 the Court will communicate the reasons for its decision on the challenge
to an arbitrator to the parties upon request of any party. 148  This gives the parties an insight into the reasoning behind the
decision.
4. 111
The LCIA Rules are more explicit. Article 10.1 states that the LCIA Court may revoke any arbitrator’s appointment if:
‘circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to that arbitrator’s impartiality or independence’. The ICDR, SCC,
SIAC, and HKIAC Arbitration Rules also adopt a ‘justifiable doubts’ test. 149

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
4. 112
The ICSID Convention states that:
A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the disqualification of any of its members on account of any
fact indicating a manifest lack of the qualities required by paragraph (1) of Article 14. A party to arbitration
proceedings may, in addition, propose the disqualification of an arbitrator on the ground that he was ineligible
for appointment to the Tribunal under Section 2 of Chapter IV. 150
The qualities required by Article 14.1 include the ability to ‘exercise independent judgment’ in the English version, whereas
the Spanish version of the same article refers to a person who ‘inspires full confidence in their impartiality of judgment’. 151
Since both versions of the ICSID Convention are equally authentic, Article 14.1 has been applied to require arbitrators to be
both impartial and independent. 152  As defined by the Chair of the ICSID Administrative Council, ‘Impartiality refers to the
absence of bias or predisposition towards a party. Independence is characterized by the absence of external control’. 153  The
Authoritative Notes to the ICSID Rules explain the effect of the independence provision:
[A]n arbitrator is to [resign] if, for instance, he may have an interest in the result of the dispute. In fact, in view
of the qualities he is required to possess, a candidate is unlikely to accept an appointment as arbitrator where
his personal interest is involved and, if he realises such involvement after the appointment, he may be trusted to
resign. The experience of other international arbitration bodies has, in this respect, apparently been reassuring;
it therefore seems unnecessary to particularise grounds for resignation. 154
The second part of Article 14.1 refers to grounds on which an arbitrator is ‘ineligible for appointment’. This refers to the
nationality provisions, which are designed to ensure that (unless the parties agree otherwise) the majority of arbitrators are
not of the nationality of either of the parties. 155
4. 113
As noted by the deciding arbitrators in one case, the ICSID Rules establish an objective standard:
The legal standard applied to a proposal to disqualify an arbitrator is an ‘objective standard based on a reasonable
evaluation of the evidence by a third party.’ As a consequence, the subjective belief of the party requesting the
disqualification is not enough to satisfy the requirements of the Convention. 156
In other words, the challenging party must rely on established facts and ‘not on any mere speculation or inference’. 157
4. 114
The interpretation of the requirement in Article 57 that the arbitrator must have a ‘manifest’ lack of the qualities established
by Article 14 has been equivocal. To some tribunals, it has referred ‘not to the seriousness of the allegation but to the ease
with which [the allegation] may be perceived’. 158  Other tribunals have taken the view that ‘manifest’ must relate to the
substance of the conflict itself such that, from the perspective of an informed reasonable person, established facts ‘make
it obvious and highly probable, not just possible, that the challenged arbitrator is a person who may not be relied upon to
exercise independent and impartial judgment’. 159
(ii) National laws
4. 115
National laws on arbitration contain tests that operate in the case of a pure ad hoc arbitration with a seat in the country. For
example, the Swiss PIL provides that an arbitrator may be challenged if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts
as to his or her impartiality or independence. 160

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
4. 116
Section 24(1) of the English Arbitration Act 1996 is more comprehensive:
Section 24:(1)
(1) A party to arbitral proceedings may (upon notice to the other parties, to the arbitrator concerned and
to any other arbitrator) apply to the court to remove an arbitrator on any of the following grounds:
(a) that circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his impartiality;
(b) that he or she does not possess the qualifications required by the arbitration agreement;
(c) that he or she is physically or mentally incapable of conducting the proceedings or there are
justifiable doubts as to his capacity to do so;
(d) that he or she has refused or failed—
(i) properly to conduct the proceedings, or
(ii) to use all reasonable despatch in conducting the proceedings or making an award,
(iii) and that substantial injustice has been or will be caused to the applicant. 161
The UK Supreme Court considered this standard of disqualification and found that the relevant test is an objective one,
namely ‘whether the fair-minded and informed observer, having considered the facts, would conclude that there was a real
possibility that the tribunal was biased’. 162
4. 117
In the United States, the duty of avoiding evident partiality is established by section 10(a) of the Federal Arbitration Act
of 1925 (FAA):
(a) In any of the following cases the United States court in and for the district wherein the award was made
may make an order vacating the award upon the application of any party to the arbitration—
close … ]
 
(1) Where the award was procured by corruption, fraud, or undue means;
 
(2) where there was evident partiality or corruption in the arbitrators, or either of them;
close … ]
This section has been interpreted as including a strict duty of disclosure. The US Supreme Court set a high standard in
Commonwealth Coatings by requiring disclosure of any dealings that might create an impression of bias. In that case, an
arbitral award was set aside for failure to disclose business connections with one of the parties, even though the award was
unanimous and the Court found that there was no actual bias. 163  Yet US courts have been divided over the precise standard
required to show evident partiality. Whereas several circuits have generally held that bias is found where a reasonable person
would have to conclude that an arbitrator was partial, 164  other circuits have held that a reasonable impression of partiality
would suffice. 165
4. 118

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
In France, Article 1456 of the Code of Civil Procedure explicitly states that before accepting appointment an arbitrator shall
disclose any circumstance that may affect his or her independence or impartiality’. 166  If one party considers that the arbitrator
is not independent or impartial, the issue shall be resolved by the institution administering the arbitration or, where there is
no such institution, by the judge acting in support of the arbitration to whom application must be made within one month
following the disclosure or the discovery of the fact at issue. 167
(c) Procedure for challenge
4. 119
The procedure for challenge of an arbitrator appears in the applicable arbitration rules or, in the event of an ad hoc arbitration, in
the arbitration law at the seat of arbitration. Where a challenge falls to be dealt with by the courts, the procedure to be followed
is specified in the applicable procedural law. Where the rules of an arbitral institution apply, the procedure is normally that a
complaint should be made in the first instance either to the arbitral institution or to the arbitral tribunal itself. 168
4. 120
Most national laws provide for a challenge to an arbitrator to be made promptly during the arbitration. 169  The inevitable delays
to the conduct of the arbitration may be minimised by provisions that require the challenge to be made within a specified time of
becoming aware of the grounds for that challenge, or by provisions that permit the arbitration to continue whilst the challenge
is pending. Such provisions are to be found, for example, in the Model Law and the English Arbitration Act 1996. 170
4. 121
A curious gap in the FAA leaves the parties no avenue of judicial review of an arbitrator appointment in an ad hoc arbitration
until after an award has been rendered, unless the rules of procedure adopted by the parties provide for earlier review. 171  This
means that a party with a valid objection to the composition of the tribunal would have to make an objection ‘on the record’
and then wait until the end of the case before challenging the award. In Sussex, the US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
reasoned that court intervention mid-arbitration should occur only in extreme cases and that the challenge to an arbitrator for
an apparent conflict of interest was ‘emphatically’ not an extreme case. 172
(i) ICC challenge procedure
4. 122
Article 14 of the ICC Rules provides that a party seeking to challenge an arbitrator must do so within thirty days of the date of
notification of the appointment or the date on which that party became aware of the circumstances giving rise to the challenge.
The challenge must be made in writing, specifying the facts and circumstances on which it is based. The ICC Court will then
decide on the challenge after the Secretariat has afforded an opportunity to the arbitrator concerned, the other party, and the
other members of the tribunal to comment. 173  Those comments are to be communicated to the parties and to the arbitrators.
4. 123
Article 11.4 of the 2012 ICC Rules expressly stated that the reasons for the challenge decision would not be communicated. 174
As noted above, since 2015, the ICC has changed its practice and now, under Article 5 of Appendix II and upon request of
any party, the Court will communicate the reasons for its decisions on challenges to arbitrators. 175
(ii) LCIA challenge procedure
4. 124
Under the LCIA Rules, a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator must send a written statement of the reasons for
challenge to the LCIA Court, the arbitral tribunal, and all other parties, within fourteen days of the establishment of the

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
arbitral tribunal, or within fourteen days of becoming aware of the circumstances justifying the challenge. 176  The LCIA
Court will give the other parties and the challenged arbitrator a chance to comment on the challenge. Unless the challenged
arbitrator withdraws (or the other party agrees to the challenge) within fourteen days of receipt of the written statement of
reasons, the LCIA Court will decide on the challenge. 177  The LCIA Rules expressly require that the decision of the LCIA
Court—which, in practice, may be represented by the President, the Vice President, Honorary or former Vice Presidents,
or any three members of the LCIA Court—shall be made in writing, with reasons. 178  Indeed, if the parties so request, the
division may even hold an oral hearing in this regard.
(iii) UNCITRAL challenge procedure
4. 125
Under the UNCITRAL Rules, any challenge must be notified to the other party and to the members of the arbitral tribunal,
including the challenged arbitrator. 179  The time limit for submitting a challenge is fifteen days. 180  The merits of challenges
are decided by the appointing authority, 181  and whether reasons will accompany the challenge decision will depend upon
the identity of the appointing authority.
(iv) ICSID challenge procedure
4. 126
Any ‘proposal for disqualification’ of an arbitrator (terminology used by the ICSID Rules) must be filed with the Secretary-
General of ICSID within twenty-one days of either (a) the constitution of the tribunal; or (b) the date on which the party
proposing the disqualification first knew or should have known of the facts on which the proposal is based. 182  The party
proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator must state the grounds on which it is based and a statement of relevant facts,
law, and arguments plus supporting documents. 183  The other party must file its response to the proposal for disqualification
within twenty-one days. 184  The challenged arbitrator may make a statement limited to factual information relating to the
challenge within a further five day period. 185  Each party is then permitted to file a final simultaneous statement seven days
following the arbitrator’s statement. 186
4. 127
If the challenge is directed against one arbitrator in an arbitral tribunal of three, the decision is taken by the other two
arbitrators. 187  If they cannot agree, the decision will be made by the Chair of the ICSID Administrative Council. 188  The
decision will also be made by the Chair if the challenge is directed against a sole arbitrator, or against the majority of the
arbitral tribunal. 189  The decision will be reasoned. 190  For as long as the constitution of the arbitral tribunal is in doubt because
of a challenge to one or more of the arbitrators, the arbitral proceedings are suspended unless the parties agree otherwise. 191
If the challenge is upheld, a vacancy is created in the arbitral tribunal, which must be filled before the proceedings resume.
If the challenge is rejected, the arbitration proceeds.
(d) Principal bases for challenge
4. 128
In order to understand how challenge decisions are taken, in this section we will consider some of the responses given by the
decision-making bodies in contexts such as:
 
• where there is an alleged connection between the arbitrator and one of the parties;
 
• where there is an alleged connection between the arbitrator and counsel for one of the parties (which can include, by way
of example, where the arbitrator and counsel belong to the same barristers’ chambers);

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
 
• where the arbitrator acts as counsel for a third party in a dispute involving similar issues, in which he or she is advancing
a case contrary to that of one of the parties to the dispute before him or her as arbitrator (the so-called double-hat dilemma);
and
 
• where the arbitrator makes a statement that is alleged to involve a pre-judgment of an issue in the dispute.
(i) Connection with one of the parties
4. 129
A connection with one of the parties can arise in different scenarios. The IBA Guidelines provide detailed guidance on
a range of specific disqualifying connections. We have already addressed the question of the connection established by
repeat appointments by the same party and the risks that such appointments raise. 192  Separately, an arbitrator should not be
acting simultaneously as counsel in separate proceedings involving one of the parties. For example, in ICS Inspection and
Control Services Limited v Argentina I, 193  the appointing authority deemed that a challenged arbitrator who was serving as
counsel in an arbitration against the same respondent was in a situation of adversity towards the respondent and that, absent
circumstances that would eliminate any justifiable doubts as to the challenged arbitrator’s impartiality and independence, the
challenge should be sustained. 194
4. 130
If the arbitrator (or a close family member 195 ) has a significant financial interest in one of the parties, or in the subject
matter in dispute in the arbitration, a challenge would be upheld. 196  In one UNCITRAL case, the respondent challenged the
claimant’s party-appointed arbitrator due to his connections with a financing partner of the claimant on the project that formed
part of the subject matter of the arbitration. 197  It was not disputed that the challenged arbitrator had been the legal director and
a member of the executive committee of that financing partner prior to the arbitration (and was expected to receive a pension
from the company as a result of his services) nor that he was a shareholder of the company. The Secretary-General of the
PCA first determined that the financing partner had a material participation in the project and concluded that the arbitrator’s
relationship with the financing partner (even though not a party to the arbitration) was enough to give rise to justifiable
doubts as to his impartiality or independence in a dispute involving the project. The Secretary-General concluded that these
circumstances were enough for an informed and objective third party to find justifiable doubts as to the challenged arbitrator’s
impartiality and independence. A similar conclusion was reached by the LCIA Court when it concluded that a reasonable
and objective third party would have justifiable doubts as to the co-arbitrator’s independence based on the following facts:
(1) the arbitrator was employed by and taught at a university; (2) the chair of the board of the respondent was a member of
the university’s Board of Trustees; (3) the university had a cooperation agreement with the respondent; and (4) the claimant
in the arbitration expected to refer to decisions approved by members of the board of the respondent in the arbitration. 198
4. 131
However, the connection with one of the parties needs to be material. In Suez et al. v Argentina, disqualification was sought
in an ICSID case by the respondent based on the fact that one arbitrator was a non-executive director of an investment bank
that held a small participation in two of the claimant companies, principally as a portfolio investor on behalf of others. 199
The other members of the tribunal considered it to be a remote connection that could not be sufficient in and of itself to
justify a disqualification. 200
4. 132
As defined by the tribunal in that case, a further step is required: the alleged connection must be evaluated qualitatively in
order to decide whether it constitutes a fact indicating a manifest lack of independence of judgement and impartiality. This
was addressed by means of a four-point test.
 
oProximity
How closely connected is the challenged arbitrator to one of the parties? The closer the connection between the arbitrator
and a party, the more likely it is that the relationship may influence an arbitrator’s independence and impartiality.

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
 
oIntensity
How intense and frequent are the interactions between the arbitrator and one of the parties? The more frequent and
intense the interaction, the more likely it is that the arbitrator’s independence and impartiality will be affected.
 
oDependence
To what extent is the challenged arbitrator dependent on one of the parties for benefits? The more dependent the arbitrator
is on a relationship for benefits or advantages, the more likely it is that the relationship may influence the arbitrator’s
independence and impartiality.
 
oMateriality
To what extent are any benefits accruing to the arbitrator as a result of the alleged connection significant? Significant
benefits derived from a relationship will be more likely to influence an arbitrator’s independence and impartiality than
negligible or insignificant benefits. 201
4. 133
A connection can also exist if an arbitrator has acted as counsel on unrelated matters to one of the parties. 202  In a novel
UNCITRAL case, the respondent challenged the claimant’s party-appointed arbitrator on the basis that the arbitrator had acted
as counsel for the challenging party. The appointing authority considered that the challenging party could not demonstrate
how the independence of the arbitrator would be in question as he did not have a personal interest in the dispute. However,
the appointing authority concluded that an objective observer would have justified doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality
considering the frequency with which the challenged arbitrator had acted as counsel for the respondent (and curiously the
challenging party). 203  In a similar vein, the Paris Court of Appeal set aside an ICC award on the basis that the arbitral
tribunal was not properly constituted since the arbitrator in question had failed to disclose existing links between his law firm
and entities linked to one of the parties during the course of the proceedings. The Court concluded that these circumstances
created a reasonable doubt as to the arbitrator’s independence and impartiality. 204
(ii) Connection with counsel or experts
4. 134
A connection with counsel can arise in a variety of ways. Unless the parties give their specific agreement, an arbitrator
cannot sit in a case in which he or she has a financial relationship with one of the lawyers involved. Most obviously, this
will arise if they are colleagues in the same law firm. 205  Similarly, an arbitrator who receives a significant number of repeat
appointments from the same law firm could be said to have developed a financial relationship with that firm. 206  Yet, in
two recent ICSID cases, the Chair of the Administrative Council dismissed a challenge based on an alleged history of cross-
appointments between the claimant’s counsel and the claimant’s party-appointed arbitrator, ruling that ‘without something
more’ the history of cross-appointments was not enough to question the arbitrator’s independence and impartiality. 207
4. 135
Under the same logic, in Tecso, 208  the French courts decided a challenge to an award based on an arbitrator’s failure to
disclose a shared history with the law firm in which a lawyer for one of the parties practised. The arbitrator had left the
law firm in question before the lawyer representing the party began working for the firm, although the arbitrator had since
provided the firm with two or three legal opinions. The Court of Appeal in Paris set aside the award for the failure of the
arbitrator to disclose this connection, but its decision was later reversed by the Court of Cassation. 209
4. 136
A similar issue arose in the ICSID case of Owens-Illinois v Venezuela. Venezuela challenged the claimant-appointed arbitrator
on the basis of an alleged connection between the arbitrator and his former law firm, which had not represented any of the
parties to the arbitration, but had acted in several domestic litigations and arbitrations against Venezuela and/or related state
entities. The respondent argued that the challenged arbitrator had relied upon the services of lawyers employed at his former

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
law firm as assistants to tribunals in cases in which he had served as president. The other arbitrators dismissed the challenge,
reasoning that the challenged arbitrator had no financial interest in the services rendered by his former law firm and that the
lawyers in question had acted as secretaries in cases unrelated to Venezuela. However, the deciding arbitrators also noted their
decision would have been different had the challenged arbitrator continued to have a financial interest in the law firm. 210
4. 137
England’s divided legal profession, comprising solicitors and barristers, poses a particular question when it comes to
considering an arbitrator’s connection with counsel. Unlike partners and associates at law firms, barristers within chambers
work as sole practitioners, sharing operating expenses, but not income or case information. For this reason, in English court
proceedings, there is no constraint preventing barristers from appearing against each other in the same case nor, indeed, before
a former member of their chambers who is now a judge. The situation is less straightforward in international arbitration
proceedings, which will generally involve lawyers and parties who are far less familiar with the role and workings of
barristers’ chambers.
4. 138
In Hrvatska Elektroprivreda v Republic of Slovenia, 211  the respondent state communicated the addition of a barrister to its
legal team at a very late stage of the proceedings. The barrister in question was a member of the same chambers as the chair
of the arbitral tribunal, which led to an objection by the claimant and its non-English legal counsel. Exercising its inherent
powers, the tribunal decided that the best way to safeguard the proceedings was to order the counsel in question to withdraw
from the respondent’s legal team. In so ordering, the tribunal began its discussion by observing that ‘[b]arristers are sole
practitioners’ and ‘chambers are not law firms’—but it observed that ‘[i]t is, however, equally true that this practice is not
universally understood let alone universally agreed, and that Chambers themselves have evolved in the modern market place
for professional services with the consequence that they often present themselves with a collective connotation’. 212  Taking
into account the fact that the claimant was entirely unfamiliar with the barristers’ chambers system of England and Wales, that
the respondent had consciously decided not to disclose the identity of the barrister until a very late stage in the proceedings,
and that the respondent refused to reveal the extent of that barrister’s participation, the tribunal found it necessary for counsel
to step down in order to ‘dispel’ the ‘atmosphere of apprehension and mistrust’. 213
4. 139
In Rompetrol Group NV v Romania, the tribunal considered an application to exclude claimant’s counsel for having been
formerly employed at the same law firm as the claimant’s party-appointed arbitrator. The tribunal dismissed the challenge
applying the standard set by the UK House of Lords (now the UK Supreme Court) in Porter v Magill: the facts should raise a
‘real possibility that the tribunal was biased’. The tribunal considered that the association between counsel and the arbitrator
raised no issue as to either person having a present or future financial or material interest in the other’s professional activity.
Furthermore, the tribunal concluded that ‘the Hrvatska Decision might better be seen as an ad hoc sanction for the failure to
make proper disclosure in good time than as a holding of more general scope’. 214
4. 140
In A and others v B and another, the English Commercial Court considered an application to remove an arbitrator on the
ground that there were justifiable doubts as to his impartiality because he was appointed as solicitor by claimant’s counsel
to defend one of its clients in a local litigation. The Court did not consider that a fair-minded and informed observer, who is
presumed to know how the legal profession in the country works, would conclude that there was a real possibility of apparent
bias merely because the arbitrator acted as counsel for one of the firms acting in the arbitration. The Court also dismissed the
challenging party’s reliance on the IBA Guidelines and made clear that if there was no apparent or unconscious bias, applying
the English common law test, the guidelines could not alter the conclusion. 215  Similarly, in Brescla Calcio SpA v West Ham
United FC Plc, 216  the Board of the International Council of Arbitration for Sport (ICAS) upheld a challenge against the
respondent’s party-appointed arbitrator because counsel for the respondent was from the same chambers. In the view of the
Italian claimant, this circumstance ‘cast some doubts, at least in appearance, as to the arbitrator’s independence’. 217  The
ICAS Board applied an objective test and referred explicitly to the IBA Guidelines, noting that it was convinced that the
arbitrator in question was independent and impartial. In 2010, the ICC upheld a challenge to the claimant-appointed arbitrator
on the basis that she was a member of the same barristers’ chambers as two members of the claimant’s counsel. 218  As the
IBA Guidelines make clear, it is undoubtedly necessary for disclosure to take place if the arbitrator and another arbitrator, or
the counsel for one of the parties, are members of the same barristers’ chambers. 219

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
4. 141
It is noteworthy that, following the Hrvatska case, 220  English arbitrators began to insert provisions into procedural orders
or terms of reference requiring notification of the names of counsel representing the parties and authorising the tribunal
to reject counsel to whom there was a reasonable objection in order ‘to maintain the integrity of the arbitral process’. An
increasing number of arbitration rules now follow this practice by requiring the parties to identify their representatives and
authorising the tribunal to dismiss counsel from the case if the tribunal considers this necessary to maintain the integrity of
the proceedings. For example, the LCIA has included a provision in Article 18.4 requiring approval of the arbitral panel for
changes of legal counsel during the course of the arbitration. 221  Similarly, the IBA Guidelines require a party to disclose the
identity of its counsel ‘on its own initiative’ and ‘at the earliest opportunity’. 222  The IBA Rules on Party Representation in
International Arbitration provide that, after the constitution of the tribunal, no person should accept representation of a party
where there is a conflict of interest with one of the arbitrators and permit the tribunal to take measures necessary to safeguard
the integrity of the proceedings, including by excluding the new party representative. 223
4. 142
An additional concern has arisen when there is a connection between a member of the arbitral tribunal and the party-appointed
experts in the case. In Eiser v Spain, an award was annulled for improper constitution of the tribunal and for a serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure, based on one arbitrator’s close ties with a party-appointed valuation expert. Spain
challenged the award after it became aware of the relationship between the claimant’s party-appointed arbitrator and the
claimant’s damages experts in that case, which had not been disclosed in a timely manner by the arbitrator. The annulment
committee reasoned that there were several past and present professional connections and interactions in various capacities
between the arbitrator (as such and formerly as counsel in his prior law firm) and the expert. 224  The annulment committee
first determined that the arbitrator had failed to comply with his obligation to disclose the relationship and then concluded
that the arbitral tribunal had not been properly constituted. 225
(iii) Issue conflict
4. 143
The notion of issue conflict is not a universal one and does not have a settled definition. Broadly, an issue conflict may
arise when (i) an arbitrator has already decided in a previous case an issue arising in a later arbitration; (ii) an arbitrator has
previously published views on an issue arising in a later arbitration; and/or (iii) an arbitrator is a member of or is associated
with a law firm representing clients facing the same or similar issues as those on which the arbitrator will rule—the so-
called ‘double-hat’ dilemma (see further below at 4.151). 226  In CC/Devas v India Judge Peter Tomka, former president of
the International Court of Justice, stated his understanding of issue conflict in the following terms: 227
The conflict is based on a concern that an arbitrator will not approach an issue impartially, but rather with a
desire to conform to his or her own view. In this respect [ … ] some challenge decisions and commentators
have concluded that knowledge of the law or views expressed about the law are not per se sources of conflict
that require removal of an arbitrator; likewise, a prior decision in a common area of law does not automatically
support a view that an arbitrator may lack impartiality. Thus, to sustain any challenge brought on such a basis
requires more than simply having expressed any prior view; rather, I must find, on the basis of the prior view
and any other relevant circumstances, that there is an appearance of prejudgment of an issue likely to be relevant
to the dispute on which the parties have a reasonable expectation of an open mind.
4. 144
The Report of the ASIL-ICCA Joint Task Force on Issue Conflicts in Investor–State Arbitration explained that questions
arising under the rubric of ‘issue conflict’ go to the arbitrator’s state of mind, something that is often dependent on context
and is not readily susceptible to measurement with mechanical rules, so that ‘whatever the precise term used, we must revert
to the central question, which is when does a predisposition become inappropriate?’ 228

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
4. 145
Challenges in investment arbitrations have been mounted on the basis of prior arbitrations where the challenged arbitrator
expressed his or her views on similar legal concepts and/or publication by an arbitrator of opinions that pertain to an issue
in dispute in the arbitration. 229  Generally, challenges based on the arbitrator’s past expressions in scholarly or professional
writings have not been accepted. 230  The tribunal in Urbaser v Argentina 231  set a high threshold for a challenge based on such
grounds to succeed: ‘there must be a showing that such opinion or position is supported by factors related to and supporting a
party to the arbitration (or a party closely related to such party), by a direct or indirect interest of the arbitrator in the outcome
of the dispute, or by a relationship with any other individual involved, such as a witness or arbitrator’. 232  In a UNCITRAL
case, the respondent challenged the presiding arbitrator and claimant’s party-appointed arbitrator, arguing that the challenge
was not based on a lack of independence or inappropriate action but on an ‘issue conflict’. The respondent alleged that both
arbitrators had ‘strongly held and articulated positions’ on the interpretation of the ‘essential security interests’ provision in
two prior cases in which they had sat together, and that the party-appointed arbitrator had further defended his position in a
book chapter he authored. The decision defined the standard for an ‘issue conflict’ as follows:
[T]o sustain any challenge brought on such a basis requires more than simply having expressed any prior
view; rather, I must find, on the basis of the prior view and any other relevant circumstances, that there is an
appearance of pre-judgment of an issue likely to be relevant to the dispute on which the parties have a reasonable
expectation of an open mind. 233
4. 146
The appointing authority upheld the challenge against the party-appointed arbitrator and dismissed the challenge against the
presiding arbitrator. When applying the above standard, the appointing authority considered decisive that the party-appointed
arbitrator had already pronounced his views on the same legal concept in four prior arbitrations and had later defended his
position in an article analysing the decision by three different annulment committees which had annulled his decisions on
those cases. The appointing authority considered that the respondent was entitled to have its arguments heard and ruled upon
by arbitrators with an ‘open mind’ and that a reasonable observer would not believe that the respondent had a chance to
convince the arbitrator to change his mind on that legal concept. On the other hand, the appointing authority considered
that the participation of the presiding arbitrator in two of the same cases as the party-appointed arbitrator was not enough to
disqualify him, as the presiding arbitrator had not separately expressed his views on this subject and therefore could approach
the matter with an open mind and give it full consideration. 234
4. 147
Similarly, in the ICSID arbitration KS Invest and TLS Invest v Spain, the Chair of the ICSID Administrative Council reaffirmed
that the circumstance that an arbitrator had expressed his views on issues of law or fact common to two or more parallel
arbitrations was not enough evidence of partiality or the appearance thereof. 235  The Chair noted that the two cases in which
the challenged arbitrator was acting involved different investments by unrelated companies, made at different times, and in
different sectors. Further, the Chair affirmed that ‘even in cases where issues could be similar, the arguments and the manner
in which they are presented by different parties could differ depending on the particularities of each case’. 236  Based on
this, and the fact that Spain had not raised concerns about the appointment of the challenged arbitrator at the time of his
appointment (when it already knew about his appointment in the parallel arbitration), the Chair dismissed the challenge. 237
4. 148
Similarly, in another ICSID arbitration, the tribunal found that the mere fact that the challenged arbitrator had previously
argued the same or similar issues raised by the respondent state in prior arbitrations acting as counsel (for a different
respondent state) did not mean that the arbitrator was going to necessarily take the same stance in the present case. 238
4. 149
The situation was different in Perenco Ecuador Ltd v Ecuador & Empresa Estatal Petróleos del Ecuador, 239  where the
challenge arose out of a published interview with the arbitrator, in which he made various comments about Ecuador’s
disobedient behaviour, including Ecuador’s refusal to comply with orders for provisional measures. The Secretary-General
of the PCA found that, although the arbitrator did not specifically refer to the arbitration, his combination of chosen words

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
and the context in which he used them had the overall effect of painting an unfavourable view of Ecuador (which had brought
the challenge) in such a way as to give a reasonable and informed third party justifiable doubts as to his impartiality. 240
4. 150
After analysing several challenge decisions based on ‘issue-conflicts’, the ASIL-ICCA Task Force identified three prongs to
analyse whether an arbitrator could be considered impartial: (i) the degree of commitment to the arbitrator’s prior views; (ii)
the concurrency of the arbitrator’s position as both counsel and arbitrator in matters involving the same party or otherwise
related matters; and (iii) the specificity or proximity to the current case. 241
(iv) Double-hatting
4. 151
A particular scenario may arise where a lawyer is sitting in one case as an arbitrator in which a point of law is being argued,
whilst acting in another case as counsel to a party arguing that same point of law. There is no suggestion of any links with the
parties, but rather an allegation that the arbitrator will not be able to be impartial with regard to a decision on a point of law
that may be determinative in the case in which he or she is defending the interests of a client as counsel. 242  This scenario
—sometimes referred to as the ‘double-hat dilemma’—is particularly prevalent in investment arbitration cases, given the
discrete number of recurring legal concepts at issue, 243  the publicity of the investment arbitration awards (and sometimes
even the pleadings of the parties), and the repeat participation by well-known international lawyers as counsel and arbitrator.
4. 152
This arose in the Telekom Malaysia arbitration 244  where, by reason of the arbitrator’s role as counsel to an investor in a similar
investment arbitration, Ghana challenged his appointment. Ghana argued that, given that the arbitrator was simultaneously
acting for an investor in relation to similar points of law, he would be likely to adopt a position favourable to the claimant,
Telekom Malaysia. As a result, Ghana argued, the arbitrator lacked independence and impartiality. 245  While the other
members of the tribunal and the Secretariat of the PCA rejected the challenge, Ghana brought the matter for review to
the Dutch courts, The Hague being the agreed seat of the arbitration. The District Court of The Hague emphasised the
‘incompatibility’ of the arbitrator’s role as attorney and arbitrator, placing much weight on the appearance, rather than the
actual existence of bias: 246
Even if this arbitrator were able to sufficiently distance himself in chambers from his role as attorney in the
reversal proceedings [ … ] account should be taken of the appearance of his not being able to observe the said
distance. Since he has to play these two parts, it is in any case impossible for him to avoid the appearance of
not being able to keep these two parts strictly separated. 247
4. 153
To avoid giving rise to ‘justifiable doubts’ as to the arbitrator’s impartiality and independence, the Court permitted him to
continue serving on the tribunal, on the condition that he resign as counsel in the other arbitration within ten days. 248
4. 154
In KS Invest and TLS Invest v Spain, 249  the respondent state challenged the claimant’s party-appointed arbitrator on several
grounds, including his role as counsel in a parallel arbitration in which respondent’s right to regulate was being contested.
The Chair of the ICSID Administrative Council dismissed the challenge, noting that the arbitration in which the challenged
arbitrator was acting as counsel concerned different claimants, different respondents, different subsectors of the energy
industry, and different measures. Given the multiple differences between the two cases, the Chair considered that a reasonable
evaluation from a third party could not conclude that the arbitrator manifestly lacked the qualities required under Article
14(1) of the ICSID Convention.
4. 155

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
The issue of double-hatting continues to create concern and is far from settled. In an effort to provide some certainty on the
issue, the Draft Code of Conduct for Adjudicators in Investor–State Dispute Settlement, prepared by the Secretariats of ICSID
and UNCITRAL, provides a series of options from an outright prohibition to informed consent of the disputing parties. 250
However, some law firms active as counsel in investment arbitrations have been self-policing and adopted internal policies
prohibiting lawyers at the firm from acting as arbitrators in investment disputes.
(v) Pre-judgment
4. 156
In one UNCITRAL case, the respondent state challenged one of the arbitrators based on comments made during the hearing,
alleging that the arbitrator’s comments pre-judged one of the issues in the arbitration. 251  During the cross-examination of an
expert, the arbitrator had made a comment that could be interpreted as suggesting that the respondent had caused compensable
damage to the claimant. The challenge was heard by a division of the LCIA Court, by agreement of the parties. The LCIA
admitted that, in isolation, the statement in question could lead a reasonable third person to believe that the arbitrator was
pre-judging an issue. However, the LCIA noted that, immediately after the comment in question, the arbitrator clarified that
he was posing hypothetical questions to the expert, which from a reasonable point of view eliminated any appearance of
pre-judgment. 252
4. 157
Even when comments made by an arbitrator do reveal an evolving thought process, the courts have made it clear that this is a
natural result of evaluating evidence. For example, in Fairchild & Co. Inc. v Richmond, 253  the DC District Court held that:
[An arbitrator’s] legitimate efforts to move the proceedings along expeditiously may be viewed as abrasive or
disruptive to a disappointed party [ … ] such displeasure does not constitute grounds for vacating an arbitration
award [ … ] [E]vident partiality is not demonstrated where an arbitrator consistently relies upon the evidence
and reaches the conclusions favourable to one party [ … ] The mere fact that arbitrators are persuaded by one
party’s arguments and choose to agree with them is not of itself sufficient to raise a question as to the evident
partiality of the arbitrators.
4. 158
Conversely, the LCIA Court upheld a challenge and removed an arbitrator after he prematurely expressed his views on the
merits of the case. The LCIA Court reasoned that the arbitrator ‘conveyed the impression to an objective and informed
observer that he had prejudged the merits of the counterclaims at the jurisdictional phase, creating thereby an appearance
of bias’. 254
(e) Conflict waiver
4. 159
A question arises concerning the obligation of a party to raise promptly any objection concerning the independence or
impartiality of an arbitrator (or any other ground of challenge) when the facts upon which the challenge is based come to its
attention.
4. 160
In the ICSID Rules, Rule 28 (‘Waiver’) states clearly that a party who fails to object promptly to an alleged violation of a relevant
rule or a decision of the Tribunal or Secretary-General is deemed to have waived its right to object. Similarly, under Article 40
of the ICC Rules, Article 31 of the ICDR Rules, Article 32.1 of the LCIA Rules, 255  and Article 40.1 of the SIAC Rules, 256  a
party who does not promptly raise objections to any non-compliance with such rules will be treated as having waived its right
to object. 257  Further, Article 14.2 of the ICC Rules provides that a challenge must be made within the prescribed time limit

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
for it to be admissible. 258  Under Article 13(2) of the Model Law, challenges related to impartiality or independence must be
filed with the arbitral tribunal within fifteen days of the party becoming aware of the circumstances giving rise to justifiable
doubts. 259  The question then arises if the same objection can be raised later in a challenge to the award or on enforcement
proceedings. Whilst this question has not been resolved definitively, the better view is that a failure to comply with the time
limits to challenge an arbitrator should bar any attack of the award on this basis.
4. 161
In common law jurisdictions, the concept of waiver is well established: a party may not ‘lie in ambush’ with an objection to await
the decision of the tribunal. In A.S.M Shipping Ltd of India v T.T.M.I Ltd of England, the English Commercial Court ruled that:
It is unacceptable to write making further objections after the hearing was concluded. X KC had made his decision
not to recuse himself, rightly or wrongly, at the beginning of the third day. Owners were faced with a straight
choice: come to the court and complain and seek his removal as a decision maker or let the matter drop. They
could not get themselves into a position whereby if the award was in their favour they would drop their objection
but make it in the event that the award went against them. A ‘heads we win and tails you lose’ position is not
permissible in law as section 73 makes clear. The threat of objection cannot be held over the head of the tribunal
until they make their decision and could be seen as an attempt to put unfair and undue pressure upon them. 260
4. 162
Similarly, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, 261  considered that a respondent had waived its right to
challenge an award based on an arbitrator’s alleged insufficient disclosure because it had constructive knowledge of such
disclosure at the time of the appointment and failed to challenge the arbitrator at that time. The Court strongly affirmed that:
This is the paradigmatic case of the ‘sore loser,’ so to speak, trying for a second bite at the apple—and the exact
type of case the law disfavors. A party should not be permitted to game the system by rolling the dice on whether
to raise the challenge during the proceedings or wait until it loses to seek vacatur on the issue. Nor should a party
‘wait[] until [it] los[es] and then almost immediately beg[i]n scouring the internet for anything that might suggest
one arbitrator or another was biased against it.’ This is all to say, under the constructive knowledge standard, a
party may not conduct a background investigation on an arbitrator after the award with the sole motivation to
seek vacatur. If it were any other way, arbitrations would cease to have finality and result in endless hearings
within hearings. 262
4. 163
The concept of waiver is also known in civil law countries. A challenge to an arbitrator under the Swiss PIL must be brought
within thirty days since the requesting party became aware or should have been aware of the ground for challenge and it must be
communicated to the other members of the tribunal within the same time limit. 263  Under French law, parties have one month
from discovery of the fact at issue to file a challenge. 264  The Court of Cassation has consistently dismissed cases where the
facts upon which the challenge was based were publicly accessible and were not brought in a timely manner. For example, in
2016 the Court of Cassation rejected an appeal by the challenging party based on an alleged connection between an arbitrator
and the other party’s legal expert as it considered that, through simple research on publicly accessible websites, the challenging
party could have made itself aware of those relationships. As such, the Court confirmed that parties have a duty to investigate
in order to identify publicly available information about the arbitrators that may call into question their independence and
impartiality. 265  Similarly, in 2017, the Court of Cassation upheld a decision of the Court of Appeal in Paris not to set aside
an award on the ground that the arbitral tribunal had been unlawfully constituted, noting that the documents relied upon by the
challenging party had been in the public domain since the appointment of the arbitrator and the challenging party could have,
but failed, to raise its objection within the 30-day time limit. 266  However, it should be stressed that a party can only be deemed
to have waived its rights to challenge based on facts that it was aware of or should have reasonably been aware of. 267
4. 164
Finally, it is noteworthy that the community of arbitration specialists recognises the importance of prompt action when a ground
for challenge is asserted. In the IBA Guidelines, with the exception of red list conflicts, General Standard 4(a) requires a party

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
to make an explicit objection within thirty days of any disclosure by the arbitrator, or of a party, of facts or circumstances that
could constitute a potential conflict of interest, otherwise the party is deemed to have waived the potential conflict.
4. 165
A discussion of waiver is incomplete without a consideration of the emerging phenomenon of ‘advance’ waivers. Since a
considerable number of arbitrators work at large law firms, there is a practice whereby such arbitrators send advance waivers to
the parties prior to accepting an appointment. Such waivers vary in form, but typically amount to a request for advance clearance
from the parties to the effect that the acceptance of the arbitral appointment will not inhibit other lawyers from the same law firm
from acting for or against any party involved in the arbitration, as long as such separate mandate is unrelated to the arbitration.
Advance waivers raise questions of party autonomy and informed consent. The approach of the leading institutions regarding
such waivers is inconsistent. The ICC issued a Note on Conflict Disclosures by Arbitrators in which it expressed that ‘[a]lthough
an advance declaration or waiver in relation to possible conflicts of interest arising from facts and circumstances that may arise
in the future may or may not in certain circumstances be taken into account by the Court, such advance declaration or waiver
does not discharge an arbitrator from his or her ongoing duty to disclose’. 268  For its part, the IBA Guidelines acknowledge the
increasing use of such advanced waivers, and also confirm that they do not discharge an arbitrator’s ongoing duty of disclosure,
but do not take a position on their validity and effect. 269
(f) Conclusion on challenges
4. 166
A prospective arbitrator should carefully consider whether to accept an appointment. The prospective arbitrator should not
accept the appointment if there is reason to believe that either party will genuinely feel that he or she is not independent or
impartial. Where a party objects after the arbitrator has been appointed and both parties agree that the arbitrator should resign,
then this is determinative—the arbitrator should resign. The arbitrator should also resign if it seems, on reflection, that the
objection is, or appears to be, well founded, whether or not the parties agree. 270
4. 167
However, if the objection appears to be without merit, the traditional view is that the arbitrator should not resign but should
usually wait for the matter to be resolved through the relevant challenge procedure, in order to discourage unmeritorious
disruptive tactics. This is seen as a matter of principle: if a party nominates a perfectly acceptable arbitrator (the ‘judge of its
choice’) and wishes that arbitrator to remain even though an objection has been made, that arbitrator should remain in place
unless the appropriate authority rules to the contrary. However, if the issue becomes unnecessarily acrimonious and drawn-
out, a challenged arbitrator may decide to resign rather than fight on a matter of principle (particularly where the case is at
an early stage).
(g) Filling a vacancy
4. 168
A replacement arbitrator must be appointed where a member of a three-person tribunal resigns or is successfully challenged
and the other two members do not proceed as a truncated tribunal. 271  If the arbitration is being conducted under institutional
rules, in a seat with a sophisticated arbitration law, or under a properly drawn submission agreement, the procedure for replacing
an arbitrator will be specified. 272  In general, the new appointment is made in the same way as the original appointment. 273
However, Article 15.4 of the ICC Rules and Article 11.1 of the LCIA Rules, grant discretion to the appointing authority in
deciding whether to select a replacement arbitrator following the original procedure. 274
4. 169
Problems are likely to arise in replacing an arbitrator in pure ad hoc arbitrations. The parties themselves may be able to reach
an agreement as to the method by which the arbitrator should be replaced and this approach should certainly be attempted first.
However, if the parties cannot agree, either on the choice of a replacement arbitrator or on the way of making that choice, then

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
an approach to the relevant national court must be considered. Since an arbitral tribunal is already in existence and the place of
arbitration will almost certainly have been decided, the request for the appointment of a replacement arbitrator should be made
to the courts at the seat of arbitration. It is necessary to ensure that the court has the power to make the appointment, but most
developed national systems of law confer such powers. 275  Nevertheless, it is best not to rely upon recourse to the courts if it
can be avoided. To that end, the following guidelines are suggested:
 
• Where provision is to be made for an arbitration to be conducted according to the rules of an arbitral institution, those
rules should be checked to make sure that they contain adequate provision for the filling of a vacancy.
 
• Where an arbitration is to be conducted ad hoc under the terms of a submission agreement, adequate provisions for the
filling of any vacancy should be written into the submission agreement.
 
• Where an arbitration is to be conducted ad hoc without any formal submission agreement, it should be held only in a
country in which the local law contains adequate provision for filling any vacancy that may arise. 276
(h) Truncated tribunals
4. 170
Most party-appointed arbitrators act properly and in good faith. It occasionally happens, however, that a party-appointed
arbitrator refuses to participate in the arbitration or submits a resignation without sufficient reason. If this happens early in
the proceedings or if the case is one in which the interests of justice do not require a quick decision, a replacement may be
appointed. 277
4. 171
Appointing a new arbitrator may, however, be impractical when the resignation, or refusal to participate, occurs late in
the proceedings. Finding and appointing a replacement and allowing the new arbitrator to become familiar with the case,
inevitably causes delay. This is particularly aggravated if the arbitrator chooses to resign or refuses to participate at the stage of
deliberations. In such cases, and when a quick conclusion to the arbitration is essential, the only sensible course may be for the
two remaining arbitrators to continue with the proceedings and to render an award without the participation of the third arbitrator.
4. 172
A number of celebrated cases provide examples of situations in which arbitral tribunals have continued proceedings and
rendered awards as truncated tribunals. 278  Most of these have been pure ad hoc arbitrations, but there have been cases under
the UNCITRAL Rules 279  and the ICC Rules. 280
4. 173
One US commentator has written:
I find it very hard to imagine that, even in the absence of an express rule or agreement, a modern court in a state
that otherwise has a public policy of supporting international commercial arbitration would invalidate an award
issued by a majority of arbitrators because a party-appointed arbitrator, in an effort to frustrate the arbitration,
chooses to absent himself at a late stage of the proceedings, or refuses to sign an award. National laws that refer
to participation by three arbitrators should be interpreted to have been satisfied, as Professor Gaillard suggests,
when all three have had a fair and equal opportunity to participate. 281
4. 174
Most of the world’s leading international arbitral institutions followed this rule, originally adopted by the AAA. 282  The LCIA
has followed the philosophy of leaving the question of whether to proceed on a truncated basis entirely to the discretion of the
remaining arbitrators, subject to approval by the LCIA Court. 283  For its part, the ICC adopted a more restrictive approach:

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
Subsequent to the closing of the proceedings, instead of replacing an arbitrator who has died or been removed
by the Court pursuant to Articles 15(1) and 15(2), the Court may decide, when it considers it appropriate, that
the remaining arbitrators shall continue the arbitration. In making such determination, the Court shall take into
account the views of the remaining arbitrators and of the parties and such other matters that it considers appropriate
in the circumstances. 284
Thus, not only does the ICC limit the possibility of a truncated tribunal to the deliberations phase, but also it is the ICC Court
that makes the decision, rather than the remaining members of the tribunal.
4. 175
Several cases in which arbitral tribunals have decided to proceed in truncated form have come into the public domain. The
most sensational involved the government of a country in south-east Asia, which exerted considerable pressure to withdraw
on the arbitrator whom it had appointed. The final award contains a passage stating comprehensively the relevant facts and
analysing the legal consequences. The conclusion of the two remaining arbitrators, relying on the published works of a well-
known international jurist, was that it could— and indeed should—proceed in truncated form to render a final award. 285
4. 176
So far as the UNCITRAL Rules are concerned, 286  there is respectable authority supporting the legitimacy of an award issued by
a truncated tribunal, where appropriate. In pure ad hoc arbitrations in which the parties have not chosen the UNCITRAL Rules,
it is wise for the remaining arbitrators to proceed with caution; at the very least, they should review any relevant provisions of
the lex arbitri and (if they are aware of it) the law of the place of likely enforcement of the award.
4. 177
In sum, the option of proceeding as a truncated tribunal, rather than as a reconstituted full tribunal, will remain as an exceptional
measure to be adopted only when the arbitration is nearing its end and where there is clear evidence that the arbitrator concerned,
voluntarily or involuntarily, has likely been associated with an abuse of the process. 287
(i) Procedure following the filling of a vacancy
4. 178
An important practical question arises when a vacancy in the arbitral tribunal is filled: to what extent must the newly constituted
arbitral tribunal retrace its steps? This will depend on the applicable institutional rules. The UNCITRAL Rules provide that,
where an arbitrator is replaced, ‘the proceedings shall resume at the stage where the arbitrator who was replaced ceased to
perform his or her functions, unless the arbitral tribunal decides otherwise’. 288  The ICC Rules provide that the reconstituted
tribunal will determine, after having invited the parties to comment, whether and to what extent any prior proceedings shall be
repeated. However, if the parties agree on a solution, the tribunal will usually follow such agreement. 289  For its part, Article
34 of the WIPO Rules provides that ‘[w]henever a substitute arbitrator is appointed, the Tribunal shall, having regard to any
observations of the parties, determine in its sole discretion whether all or part of any prior hearings are to be repeated’. 290  The
2020 version of the LCIA Rules contains broadly similar provisions. 291
4. 179
In national arbitration laws, the approaches vary. The Model Law is silent on this issue, thus leaving the question to the tribunal’s
discretion. US courts have abandoned their previous stance requiring that the proceedings were repeated. 292  However, there is
no consensus on this matter as some national laws require the repetition of all prior proceedings while others do not. 293
4. 180
Given that most rules grant a considerable discretion to the tribunal on the extent of a rehearing, how should that discretion be
exercised? If the oral hearings have not begun when the vacancy arises, it is sufficient for the replacement arbitrator to be given

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
18
time to read the pleadings and other documents exchanged between the parties, to consider any procedural directions given
by the former arbitral tribunal, and to signify his or her assent to them (in writing). However, if the vacancy is filled after the
oral proceedings have begun, the question arises as to whether evidence that has already been heard and legal arguments that
have already been advanced orally should be repeated for the benefit of the replacement arbitrator. Such repetition is both time-
consuming and expensive. It is in the interests of all parties to try to avoid it, if at all possible.
4. 181
Where a transcript is available, it should be sufficient for the replacement arbitrator to read the transcript and so bring himself
or herself up to date with the proceedings. If, as a result of such reading, the replacement arbitrator wishes to have a particular
witness recalled, or a particular argument explained in more detail, it may be in the interests of all parties to agree that this
should be done in the most economic form possible (for example, by a remote hearing of such witness), rather than run the risk
of having to start the oral proceedings again from the beginning. Where there is no transcript of the oral hearing, the extent to
which oral evidence and argument already presented needs to be repeated is a question that can be resolved only by discussion
between the members of the arbitral tribunal (including the replacement member), the parties, and their legal advisers.
Footnotes
133
Excessive use of arbitrator challenges as a form of guerrilla tactic has become quite widespread amongst arbitration
counsel. See Horvath and Wilske, ‘Guerrilla tactics in international arbitration’ (2013) 28 IALL (Kluwer Law
International) 42. In one extreme case reported by the ICC, a party filed 29 successive challenges against all members
of the tribunal, all of which were dismissed. See ICC Dispute Resolution 2020 Statistics, ICC Publication No. DRS
895ENG, 2020 (ICC 2020 Statistics), p. 13, fn.13 available online at http://www.iccwbo.org/dr-stat.
134
According to the statistics published by the ICC, the number of challenges to arbitrators filed between 2015 and 2020 has
more than doubled. In 2020, there were 92 challenges of which five were accepted by the Court. ICC Dispute Resolution
2020 Statistics, fn. 133, p. 13. In 2020, among the 407 cases registered with the LCIA, only six challenges were heard by
the LCIA Court (1.5% of these cases) and only one challenge was successful. See LCIA, Annual Casework Report 2020,
p. 22, available online at https://www.lcia.org/News/lcia-news-annual-casework-report-2020-and-changes-to-the-lcia-
c.aspx. ICSID also reports a very low rate of success for arbitrator challenges: https://icsid.worldbank.org/cases/content/
tables-of-decisions/disqualifcation.
135
For a specific and more recent analysis of challenges in both international commercial arbitrations and investment treaty
arbitrations, see Ali, Wessel, et al., ‘The International Arbitration Rulebook: A guide to arbitral regimes’, in Ali, Wessel,
et al. (eds) The Arbitral Tribunal (Kluwer Law International, 2019), pp. 321–333; Sabahi, Rubins, et al., Investor-State
Arbitration (2nd edn, Oxford University Press, 2019), pp. 227–288.
136
By way of example, a respondent state filed six challenges to the same arbitrator in the same arbitration. All were
dismissed. In the same arbitration, the respondent state filed a proposal for disqualification of the Annulment Committee,
which was also rejected. ConocoPhillips Petrozuata BV and ors v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/30. See the details and relevant decisions of this case at https://www.italaw.com/cases/321. Since most
arbitration rules provide for the automatic suspension of the arbitral proceedings whilst the challenge is resolved
(irrespective of the merits of the challenge), some challenges are tactically brought on the eve of a long-planned hearing
resulting in the necessary abandonment of hearing dates.
137
See Malintoppi and Carlevaris, ‘Challenges to Arbitrators, Lessons from the ICC’, in Giorgetti (ed.), Challenges and
Recusals of Judges and Arbitrators in International Tribunals (Brill, 2015), p. 141; SCC Practice Note: SCC Board
Decisions on Challenges to Arbitrators 2016–2018 (2019), p. 9.
138
Repsol, SA and Repsol Butano, SA v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/38, Decision on Application for
Challenge to the Majority of the Tribunal, 13 December 2013, at [85]–[86]; Quiborax SA and Non Metallic Minerals
SA v Plurinational State of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Award, 16 September 2015, at [595].
139
See, e.g., ICSID Rules, r. 22(2) which provide for automatic suspension unless the parties agree otherwise.
140
The LCIA automatically publishes the challenge decisions online unless the parties agree to the contrary. See https://
www.lcia.org/challenge-decision-database.aspx. See, e.g., Challenge to arbitrator’s appointment pursuant to Article 10.3
of the LCIA Rules, based on Article 10.1 (justifiable doubts as to arbitrator’s independence and impartiality), LCIA Case
Reference No. 173566, Decision Rendered 21 July 2017.

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
19
141
See Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the 2012 ICC Rules of Arbitration,
8 October 2015, paras 20–22. This change was integrated into the rules from 2017—see, e.g., 2021 ICC Rules, Art.
14 and Appendix II, Art. 5.
142
See, e.g., Burlington Resources Inc. v Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision on the Proposal for
Disqualification of Francisco Orrego Vicuna, 13 December 2013.
143
See, e.g., Serafín García Armas and Karina García Gruber v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, PCA Case No. 2013-03,
Decision on the Disqualification of the Members of the Tribunal, 5 July 2017.
144
Caron and Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules: A Commentary (2nd edn, Oxford University Press, 2013), p. 208.
145
ICS Inspection, fn. 101, at [22.2].
146
Nord Stream 2 v EU, PCA, Decision on the Challenge to Mr. Peter Rees KC, 9 December 2019, at [30]. See also Merck
Sharpe & Dohme (I.A.) LLC v Republic of Ecuador, PCA Case No. 2012-10, Decision on Challenge to Arbitrator Judge
Stephen M. Schwebel, 8 August 2012.
147
The Court can replace an arbitrator on its own initiative ‘when it decides that the arbitrator is prevented de jure or de
facto from fulfilling the arbitrator’s functions, or that the arbitrator is not fulfilling those functions in accordance with the
Rules or within the prescribed time limits’. ICC Rules, Art. 15.2. Upon request of any party, the Court will communicate
the reasons for its decision. ICC Rules, Appendix II, Art. 5.
148
ICC Rules, Art. 14 and Appendix II, Art. 5.
149
See SCC Rules, Art. 19.1; ICDR Rules, Art. 14.1; SIAC Rules, Art. 11.1; HKIAC Rules, Art. 11.6.
150
ICSID Convention, Art. 57.
151
The original Spanish text reads: ‘[ … ] inspira plena confianza en su imparcialidad de juicio’.
152
Raiffeisen Bank International AG and Raiffeisenbank Austria d.d. v Republic of Croatia, ICSID Case No. ARB/17/34,
Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Stanimir Alexandrov, 17 May 2018, at [81]. See also Repsol, fn. 138, at [70].
153
Raiffeisen Bank International, fn. 152, at [81].
154
ICSID Rules, r. 8, n. C.
155
ICSID Convention, Arts 38 and 39.
156
Raiffeisen Bank International, fn. 152, at [84]. This objective standard has been applied consistently by ICSID tribunals,
e.g. in ConocoPhillips Petrozuata BV and ors v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30, Decision
on the Proposal to Disqualify L. Yves Fortier, KC, Arbitrator, 27 February 2012, at [54]–[56]; Abaclat and others v
Argentine Republic, Recommendation on Proposal for Disqualification of Prof. Pierre Tercier and Prof. Albert Jan van
den Berg, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/05, 19 December 2011, at [54]–[65].
157
KS Invest GmbH and TLS Invest GmbH v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/25, Decision on the Proposal to
Disqualify Gary Born, 30 April 2018, at [44].
158
EDF International SA v Argentina, Challenge Decision regarding Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler of 25 June
2008, at [65]–[69].
159
Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona SA v Argentine Republic, ICSID Cases Nos. ARB/03/17 and ARB/03/19,
Decision on Second Proposal for Disqualification, at [29]; Canepa Green Energy Opportunities I, Sarl. and Canepa
Green Energy Opportunities II, Sarl v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/19/4, Decision on the Second Proposal
to Disqualify Mr. Peter Rees KC, 10 February 2020, at [52].
160
An arbitrator may also be challenged (i) if he or she does not meet the qualifications agreed upon by the parties, or (ii)
if a ground for challenge exists under the arbitration rules agreed upon by the parties. See Swiss PIL, art. 180. The same
rule is contained in, for instance, the Dutch Arbitration Act 2015, s. 1033.
161
This has been held to import a ‘fair-minded and reasonable observer’ test and to require a demonstration of a real
possibility of apparent bias, rather than a real possibility of unconscious bias: see A v B and X [2011] EWHC 2345
(Comm).
162
Halliburton Company v Chubb Bermuda Insurance Ltd & Ors [2018] EWCA Civ 817, at [52].
163
However, Justice White noted that an arbitrator, who must not be held to the same standard as a judge, has no duty to
disclose ‘remote commercial connections [ … ] He cannot be expected to provide the parties with his complete and
unexpurgated business biography’: Commonwealth Coatings Corporation v Continental Casualty Co., 393 U.S. 145,
151 (1968). Lower courts have tended to follow this approach: see, e.g., Positive Software Solutions, Inc. v New Century
Finance Corporation, 476 F.3d 278, 281–82 (5th Cir. 2007).
164
See, e.g., UBS Financial Servs., Inc. v Asociacion de Empleados del Estado Libre Asociado de Puerto Rico, 997 F.3d
15, 19 (1st Cir. 2021); JCI Commc’ns, Inc. v Int’l Brotherhood of Elec. Workers, Local, 103, 324 F.3d 42, 51 (1st Cir.
2003); Certain Underwriting Members of Lloyds of London v Fla., Dep’t of Fin. Servs., 892 F.3d 501, 505–06 (2d Cir.
2018); Morelite Constr. Corp. v N.Y.C. Dist. Council Carpenters Ben. Funds, 748 F.2d 79, 84 (2d Cir. 1984); Freeman
v Pittsburgh Glass Works, LLC, 709 F.3d 240, 253 (3d Cir. 2013); Kaplan v First Options of Chicago, Inc., 19 F.3d

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
20
1503, 1523 n.30 (3d Cir. 1994); ANR Coal Co., Inc. v Cogentrix of North Carolina, Inc., 173 F.3d 493, 500 (4th Cir.
1999); Peoples Sec. Life Ins. Co. v Monumental Life Ins. Co., 991 F.2d 141, 146 (4th Cir. 1993); OOGC Am., L.L.C.
v Chesapeake Exploration, L.L.C., 975 F.3d 449, 453 (5th Cir. 2020); Positive Software Solutions, Inc. v New Century
Mortg. Corp., 476 F.3d 278, 282–83 (5th Cir. 2007); Uhl v Komatsu Forklift Co., Ltd., 512 F.3d 294, 306–07 (6th Cir.
2008); Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v Home Ins. Co., 429 F.3d 640, 645 (6th Cir. 2005).
165
See, e.g., Monster Energy Co. v City Beverages, LLC, 940 F.3d 1130, 1135–36 (9th Cir. 2019); Woods v Saturn
Distribution Corp., 78 F.3d 424, 427 (9th Cir. 1996); Aviles v Charles Schwav & Co., Inc., 435 F. App’x 824, 828–29
(11th Cir. 2011); Middlesex Mut. Ins. Co. v Levine, 675 F.2d 1197, 1200–02 (11th Cir. 1982).
166
French Code of Civil Procedure. See Cohen, ‘Indépendence des arbitres et conflits d’intérêts’ [2011] Rev Arb 614.
167
See Art. 1456(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
168
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 24(2).
169
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 24; Model Law, Art. 13; Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, s. 180; Dutch Arbitration Act 2015, s. 1033.
170
Model Law, Art. 13; English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 24(3).
171
Gulf Guaranteed Life Insurance Co. v Connecticut General Life Insurance Co., 304 F.3d 476, 490 (5th Cir. 2002), in
which the court held that ‘there is no authorisation under the FAA’s express terms for a court to remove an arbitrator
from service. Rather, even where arbitrator bias is at issue, the FAA does not provide for removal of an arbitrator from
service prior to an award, but only for potential vacatur of any award’ (emphasis original).
172
In re Sussex, 781 F.3d 1065, 1075 (9th Cir. 2015).
173
ICC Rules, Art. 14.2 and 14.3.
174
This rule led to a claim by a respondent state against the ICC in its own courts. Recourse filed by the Argentine Republic
against the ICC on 8 February 2006, requesting that the ICC’s decision (as appointing authority) be overturned for failure
to provide reasons. Two preliminary injunctions were granted by the National Contentious-Administrative Court of
Appeals of Argentina in Estado Nacional—Procuración del Tesoro de la Nación v Cámara de Comercio Internacional,
dated 3 July 2007 and 17 July 2008, available online at http://fallos.diprargentina.com/2009/07/procuracion-del-tesoro-
c-camara-de.html.
175
ICC Rules, Art. 15.2 and Appendix II, Art. 5.
176
LCIA Rules, Art. 10.3.
177
LCIA Rules, Art. 10.3–10.6.
178
LCIA Rules, Arts 3.1 and 10.6. The LCIA was one of the first institutions that started publishing decisions on challenges
in a suitably redacted form, since 2006, leading other institutions to then adopt the same approach.
179
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 13.
180
This time limit is applied strictly. For an attempt by a party to challenge facts after expiry of the fifteen-day time limit,
see AWG Group v Argentine Republic, Challenge Decision of 22 October 2007, at [21], reported as part of the challenge
decision in the parallel ICSID case of Suez and others v Argentine Republic.
181
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 13. If the appointing authority fails to decide on a challenge to an arbitrator within a reasonable
time, any party may request the Secretary General of the PCA to designate a substitute appointing authority. UNCITRAL
Rules, Art. 6.4.
182
ICSID Rules, r. 22(1)(a). If the grounds for challenge become known only when the proceedings are closed, then the
remedy is a request for an annulment of the award under r. 50.
183
Ibid, r. 22(1)(b).
184
ICSID Rules, r. 22(1)(c).
185
Ibid, r. 22(1)(d).
186
Ibid, r. 22(1)(e).
187
Ibid, r. 23(1).
188
Ibid, r. 23(2)(a) and ICSID Convention, Art. 58.
189
ICSID Convention, Art. 58.
190
Although Art. 58 of the ICSID Convention does not explicitly require a challenge decision to state reasons, in practice,
these decisions are reasoned. For instance, the annulment committee in Azurix v Argentina II, Annulment Decision of 1
September 2009, at [290], held that ‘a duty to state reasons for a decision under Article 58 might be considered implicity
[sic]’. ICSID challenge decisions are usually published. For recent examples, see Landesbank Baden-Württemberg and
ors v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/45, Decision on the Second Proposal to Disqualify All Members of
the Tribunal, 15 December 2020; Vattenfall AB and ors v Federal Republic of Germany II, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/12,
Recommendation on the Second Proposal to Disqualify the Tribunal, 6 July 2020.
191
ICSID Rules, r. 22(2) .

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
21
192
See paragraphs 4.87–4.100.
193
ICS Inspection, fn. 101, at [22.2].
194
Ibid., at [22.4].
195
The IBA Guidelines define ‘close family member’ as a spouse, sibling, child, parent, or life partner, in addition to any
other family member with whom a close relationship exists.
196
See para. 1.3 of the Non-Waivable Red List (for the arbitrator) and para. 2.2.2 of the Waivable Red List (for close family
members) of the IBA Guidelines.
197
Nord Stream 2, fn. 146, at [31]–[35].
198
LCIA Reference No. 142862, 2 June 2015.
199
Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona SA, and Vivendi Universal SA v Argentine Republic, Decision on a
Second Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, 12 May
2008, at [41]–[44].
200
Ibid., at [32]. The decision was confirmed by the US District Court for the District of Columbia in 2016. Republic of
Argentina v AWG Grp. LTD., 894 F.3d 327, 339 (D.C. Cir. 2018) UNCITRAL, Memorandum Opinion of the US District
Court for the District of Columbia, 30 September 2016.
201
Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona SA, and Vivendi Universal SA v Argentine Republic, Decision on a
Second Proposal for the Disqualification of a Member of the Arbitral Tribunal, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, 12 May
2008, at [35].
202
The fact that an arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing party and he or she
(or his or her firm) derives significant financial income from such advice is on the Non-Waivable Red List (para. 1.4).
Also on the Red List, although capable of being waived by express agreement of the parties, are instances in which an
arbitrator has previously given legal advice or provided an expert opinion to one of the parties or an affiliate of one of
the parties (para. 2.1.1), or in which he or she is currently representing or advising one of the parties or an affiliate of
one of the parties (para. 2.3.1).
203
Exeteco International Company S.L. v Republic of Peru, PCA Case No. AA 535, Decision on Challenge to Arbitrator
Mario Castillo Freyre, 28 October 2014, at [83]–[88]. In Compañía de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal
v Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on the Challenge to the President of the Committee, 3 October 2001,
at [26], the respondent state challenged the president of an ad hoc annulment committee based on the fact that another
partner in his law firm had given limited advice to one of the parties in an unrelated area, which advice was continuing,
but nearing completion. The fact had been disclosed by the president, who had no personal involvement in the advice
in question. The remaining panel members therefore dismissed the challenge.
204
See Paris cour d’appel, 27 March 2018, Case No. 16/09386. The cour de cassation confirmed the Paris cour d’appel’s
decision setting aside the award on 3 October 2019. Cass. Civ. 1, 3 October 2019, Case No. 18-15.756.
205
The situation of an arbitrator and counsel for one of the parties being at the same law firm is on the Waivable Red List,
at para. 2.3.3.
206
In this regard, as previously stated, para. 3.3.8 of the Orange List encourages arbitrators to disclose if they have ‘within
the past three years received more than three appointments by the same counsel or the same law firm’.
207
Raiffeisen Bank International, fn. 152, at [93]–[95]; Ayat Nizar Raja Sumrain and others v State of Kuwait, ICSID
Case No. ARB/19/20, Decision on the Claimants Proposal to Disqualify Prof. Zachary Douglas and Mr V.V. Veeder,
2 January 2020.
208
Tecso, Case No. 11-20.299, Cass. Civ. 1, 10 October 2012.
209
Professor Thomas Clay has argued that the language used by the cour de cassation simply states that the burden lies
with that party which doubts the arbitrator’s independence to substantiate such doubts: see Clay, ‘Arbitrage et modes
alternatifs de règlement des litiges’ [2012] Recueil Dalloz 2991. Other scholars, such as Prof. Christophe Seraglini and
Laura Weiller, consider that this decision marked a return to a more stringent control on the alleged lack of independence:
see Henry, ‘Devoir de révélation de l’arbitre: Consécration du critère de l’incidence raisonnable sur l’indépendance et
l’impartialité de l’arbitre’ (2012) 46 La Semaine Juridique 1675; Weiller, ‘Rejet de la prétendue faute de l’arbitre’ (2012)
10 Procédures, comm. 284.
210
Fábrica de Vidrios Los Andes, CA and Owens-Illinois de Venezuela, CA v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID
Case No. ARB/12/21, Reasoned Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify L Yves Fortier, KC, arbitrator, 28 March 2016.
In the same vein, Universal Compression International Holdings, SLU v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case
No. ARB/10/9, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify Prof. Brigitte Stern and Prof. Guido Santiago Tawil, arbitrators,
20 May 2011, at [52]. See also Conocophillips Petrozuata BV and ors v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/30, Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify L Yves Fortier KC, arbitrator, 15 March 2016, at [1]–[3].
211
Hrvatska Elektroprivreda v Republic of Slovenia, Tribunal’s Ruling on the Participation of Counsel, ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/24, 6 May 2008.

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
22
212
Ibid., at [17]–[18].
213
Ibid.
214
Rompetrol Group NV v Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Decision of the Tribunal on the Participation of a Counsel,
14 January 2010, at [25].
215
A and others v B and another [2011] EWHC 2345 (Comm).
216
(2012) 3 ISLR 40.
217
Ibid., at 52.
218
ICC Case No. 16553/GZ. See Cleis, The Independence and Impartiality of ICSID Arbitrators, Nijhoff International
Investment Law Series (Brill, 2017), p. 139.
219
IBA Guidelines , at [3.3.2]. The Bar Council of England and Wales issued an information note regarding barristers in
international arbitration and, in so doing, avoided a blanket ban on members of the same chambers appearing in the
same case as counsel and arbitrator. According to the Bar Council:
As a matter of English and Welsh law, there is no prohibition against an advocate appearing before an
arbitration tribunal which includes a member of his or her chambers [ … ] Nevertheless, good practice
would dictate that in circumstances where a barrister comes to understand that he or she has been instructed
in an arbitration where one or more of the members of the Tribunal are barristers in the same set of
chambers, prompt disclosure ought to be made by those instructing the barrister advocate to the legal
representatives of the other side. This will ensure as far as possible that the guidance set out in the IBA
Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration is followed (see further below). A failure
to make prompt disclosure, could ultimately, lead to a challenge to the independence of the member(s)
of the Tribunal in question.
See Bar Council of England and Wales, Information Note Regarding Barristers In International Arbitration, 6 July 2015,
pp. 4–5.
220
See paragraph 4.138.
221
LCIA Rules, Art. 18.4.
222
IBA Guidelines, Guideline 7(b).
223
IBA Guidelines on Party Representation, Guidelines 5 and 6.
224
Eiser Infrastructure, fn. 108, at [218] (‘the Committee has taken particular note of four instances where [the arbitrator]
and [the expert] worked for the same party, as counsel and expert respectively. In two of those cases, [the arbitrator],
as counsel, was interacting with [the expert], at the same time that he was acting in this case as an arbitrator and [the
expert] as a damages expert of one of the parties. This was in addition to the longstanding relationship between the [the
expert’s firm] and [the arbitrator]’s then law firm [ … ], and included another concurrent case—Bear Creek—in which
[the arbitrator] was working as counsel with [the expert’s firm]’).
225
Ibid., at [225], [228], [241]–[242].
226
Report of the ASIL-ICCA Joint Task Force on Issue Conflicts in Investor–State Arbitration, International Council for
Commercial Arbitration, 17 March 2016 (the ‘ASIL-ICCA Joint Task Force’), at [8].
227
CC/Devas (Mauritius) Ltd. and ors v Republic of India, PCA Case No. 2013-09, Respondent’s Challenge to the Hon.
Marc Lalonde as Presiding Arbitrator and Prof. Francisco Orrego Vicuna as Co-Arbitrator, 30 September 2013, at [58].
228
The ASIL-ICCA Joint Task Force, at [17]–[19].
229
It is questionable, however, if such issue conflicts will exist more broadly in purely commercial cases in which the
applicable legal systems, facts, and legal issues are varied, and the ultimate awards rarely published.
230
The ASIL-ICCA Joint Task Force, at [45]–[52].
231
Urbaser SA and others v Argentine Republic, Decision on Claimants’ Proposal to Disqualify Professor Campbell
McLachlan, Arbitrator, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/26, 12 August 2010, at [44]–[45]. The tribunal found that the taking
of a general position on an issue raised in the arbitration was not sufficient to establish bias, or even the appearance
of bias, since a reasonable person would consider that the arbitrator would still give proper consideration to the facts,
circumstances, and arguments presented by the parties in the particular case.
232
Ibid. See also Repsol v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/38, Decision on the Request for Disqualification
of the Majority of the Tribunal, at [26]–[30].
233
CC/Devas (Mauritius) , fn. 227, at [58].
234
Ibid., at [64]–[66].
235
KS Invest GmbH and TLS Invest GmbH v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/25, Decision on the Proposal to
Disqualify Prof. Kaj Hobér, 15 May 2020, at [89].

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
23
236
Ibid., at [90].
237
Ibid., at [89]–[93].
238
St. Gobain Performance Plastics v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/13, Decision on
Claimant’s Proposal to Disqualify Mr Bottini, 27 February 2013, at [77], [80]–[81].
239
Perenco Ecuador Ltd v Republic of Ecuador & Empresa Estatal Petróleos del Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6, PCA
Case No. IR-2009/1, Decision on Challenge to Arbitrator, 8 December 2009.
240
Ibid., at [48].
241
Report of the ASIL-ICCA Joint Task Force, at [65]–[70].
242
The CAS has amended its rules to prohibit arbitrators from serving as counsel at the same time in CAS cases. See Code
of Sports-related Arbitration, s. 18.
243
International investment law applied as the substantive law in these arbitrations is largely focused on specific legal
concepts of expropriation, fair and equitable treatment, and unreasonable or discriminatory measures. See Chapter 8
for more details.
244
Telekom Malaysia Berhad v Republic of Ghana, District Court of The Hague, Decision No. HA/RK2004.667, 18 October
2004.
245
Levine, ‘Dealing with arbitrator “issue conflicts” in international arbitration’ (2006) 3 Disp Res J 60, at 62; Peterson,
‘Dutch Court finds arbitrator in conflict due to role of counsel to another investor’, Investment Law and Policy Weekly
News Bulletin, 17 December 2004.
246
District Court of The Hague, Civil Law Section, Provisional Measures Judge, Challenge No. 13/2004, Petition No. HA/
RK2004/667, Decision of 18 October 2004.
247
Ibid., at [63].
248
Similarly, in ICS v Argentina, Argentina sought the removal of the investor-appointed arbitrator, who was also acting
as counsel for another investor in ICSID annulment proceedings involving Argentina. In response, ICS argued that the
annulment proceedings would soon be completed and that the arbitrator would therefore not be arguing for his investor
client at the same time as he would be entertaining the instant arbitration. The appointing authority was unconvinced by
such temporal distinctions and, referring to the IBA Guidelines, held that the conflict was ‘sufficiently serious to give
rise to objectively justifiable doubts as to [the arbitrator’s] impartiality and independence’. UNCITRAL, PCA Case No.
2010-9, Challenge Decision, 17 December 2009. See also Blue Bank International & Trust (Barbados) Ltd v Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20, Decision on the Parties’ Proposal to Disqualify a Majority of the
Tribunal, 12 November 2013.
249
KS Invest, fn. 235, at [83]–[84].
250
Draft Code of Conduct for Adjudicators in Investor–State Dispute Settlement, Version Three, September 2021,
comments by State/Commenter as of 3 November 2021, p. 8.
251
National Grid PLC v Argentine Republic, LCIA Case No. UN7949, Decision on the Challenge dated 3 December 2007,
at [38].
252
Ibid., at [95]–[96].
253
Fairchild & Co. Inc. v Richmond F & PR Co., 516 F. Supp 1305, 1313 (DDC 1981).
254
LCIA Reference No. 1322498, 24 December 2014.
255
ICC Rules, Art. 40.
256
SIAC Rules, Art. 40.1.
257
ICDR Rules, Art. 31.
258
ICC Rules, Art. 14.2.
259
Model Law, Art. 13(2). See also ICDR Rules, Art. 14.
260
ASM Shipping Ltd of India v TTMI Ltd of England, 2005 WL 3157679, at [49].
261
Goldman, Sachs & Co. v Athena Venture Partners, L.P., 803 F.3d 144, 150 (3d Cir. 2015). See also Larison v Magnotti,
37 NYS.2d 207 (NY Sup Ct 2016).
262
Goldman, Sachs & Co. v Athena Venture Partners, L.P., 803 F.3d 144, 150 (3d Cir. 2015).
263
Swiss PIL, art. 180(a). See Judgment of 30 April 2018, 37 ASA Bull. 694 (Swiss Fed. Trib.) (2019); Decision 4A_14/2012,
Swiss Supreme Court, available online at https://www.swissarbitrationdecisions.com. See also Judgment of 30 April
2018, 37 ASA Bull. 694, 695 (2019) (Swiss Fed. Trib.).
264
French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1456(3).
265
NMLK v M.X, Cass. Civ. (1e chambre civile), 25 May 2016, Case No. 14-20532.
266
Cass. Civ. (1e chambre civile), 15 June 2017, Case No. 16-17108.

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
24
267
Gerbay and Cooper, ‘Annulment and enforcement of arbitral awards in England’, in Annulment and Enforcement of
Arbitral Awards from a Comparative Law Perspective (Wolters Kluwer, 2018), pp. 81–106. See also Schwartz and
Derains, Guide to the ICC Rules of Arbitration (2nd edn, Kluwer Law International, 2005), pp. 375–386.
268
Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration, 1 January
2021, available online at https://iccwbo.org/content/uploads/sites/3/2020/12/icc-note-to-parties-and-arbitral-tribunals-
on-the-conduct-of-arbitration-english-2021.pdf.
269
IBA Guidelines, General Standard 3(b). The explanation of General Standard 3(b) provides that the Guidelines ‘do not
otherwise take a position as to the validity and effect of advance declarations or waivers, because the validity and effect
of any advance declaration or waiver must be assessed in view of the specific text of the advance declaration or waiver,
the particular circumstances at hand and the applicable law’.
270
SolEs Badajoz GmbH v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/15/38, Award, 31 July 2019, at [40]–[41].
271
Exceptionally, in the case of a three-member arbitral tribunal, the arbitration may proceed with the two remaining
members. See the discussion of truncated tribunals at paragraphs 4.170ff.
272
The Model Law, for instance, provides in its Art. 15 that ‘a substitute arbitrator shall be appointed according to the rules
that were applicable to the appointment of the arbitrator being replaced’.
273
A notable exception arises under the ICSID Rules, r. 26(3)(a), where, in order to prevent abuse, a party-nominated
arbitrator who resigns will be replaced by a person nominated by the chair of the Administrative Council of ICSID
rather than by the relevant party, unless the remaining members of the arbitral tribunal have consented to the resignation,
under r. 25(2).
274
ICC Rules, Art. 15.4 (‘the Court has discretion to decide whether or not to follow the original nominating process’);
LCIA Rules, Art. 11.1 (‘the LCIA Court may determine whether or not to follow the original nominating process for
such arbitral appointment’).
275
For example, in English law, the court has wide powers to give directions as to the making of any appointments and,
indeed, to make any necessary appointments itself: English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 18.
276
See Model Law, Art. 15.
277
In which case, the procedures for filling vacancies would apply as described above.
278
These cases were discussed at the 1990 ICCA Congress: see Schwebel and Böckstiegel, ‘Preventing delay or disruption
of arbitration’ (1991) 5 ICCA Congress Series 241, at 270–274; Maniruzzaman, ‘The authority of a truncated arbitral
tribunal—Straight path or puzzle?’, Kluwer Arbitration Blog, 15 July 2012.
279
See, e.g., Order of 17 May 1985, in Sedco Inc. v National Iranian Oil Co., Case No. 129, reprinted in (1985) 8 Iran–
US CTR 34, with concurring opinion of Judge Brower at 40; Uiterwiyk Corporation v Islamic Republic of Iran, Award
No. 375–381–1, 6 July 1988, (1988) 19 Iran–US CTR 107, at 116; also dissenting letter and supplemental opinion in
(1988) 19 Iran–US CTR 107, at [161], [169].
280
See Schwebel and Böckstiegel, fn. 278.
281
See Holtzmann, ‘How to prevent delay and disruption of arbitration: Lessons of the 1990 ICCA Stockholm
Congress’ (1991) 5 ICCA Congress Series 28 (emphasis original).
282
AAA Rules, r. R-20(b).
283
LCIA Rules, Art. 12. See also WIPO Rules, Art. 35(a).
284
ICC Rules, Art. 15.5.
285
Himpurna California Energy Ltd v Republic of Indonesia (2000) XXV YBCA 186, citing Schwebel’s Cambridge
Lauterpacht lectures, in which he referred to Republic of Colombia v Cauca Co., the French-Mexican Claims
Commission cases, the Lena Goldfields arbitration, the Sabotage cases, and the Advisory Opinion of the International
Court of Justice (ICJ) in Interpretation of Peace Treaties with Bulgaria, Hungary, and Romania.
286
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 14.2. The appointing authority, if the hearings were closed, may authorise the other arbitrators
to proceed with the arbitration and make any decision or award.
287
For consideration of the treatment of truncated tribunals by various institutions’ rules, see Maniruzzaman, ‘The authority
of a truncated arbitral tribunal: Straight path or puzzle?’ (2012) 90 Amicus Curiae 22.
288
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 15.
289
ICC Rules, Art. 15.4. See also Daele, fn. 95, para. 4.103.
290
WIPO Rules, Art. 34.
291
LCIA Rules, Art. 11.3 (‘[s]ave for any award rendered, the Arbitral Tribunal (when reconstituted) shall determine
whether, and if so to what extent, the previous proceedings in the arbitration shall stand’).
292
Wellpoint, Inc. v John Hancock Life Ins. Co., 576 F.3d 643, 647 (7th Cir. 2009).

Section H. - Challenge and Replacement of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638622...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
25
293
Egyptian Arbitration Law, art. 19(3); Indonesian Arbitration and ADR Law, art. 26(4); Dutch Arbitration Act, art.
1030(3).
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
