No new claims after the constitution of the Tribunal, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407075 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
No new claims after the constitution of the Tribunal
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
No new claims after the constitution of the Tribunal
30-42
Pursuant to art.3(2) of App.VI, once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted, no party shall make new claims, unless it has
been authorised to do so by the Tribunal, which shall consider the nature of such new claims, the stage of the arbitration, any
cost implications and any other relevant circumstances. This new provision is very similar to art.23(4) of the ICC Rules, which
provides that no new claims which fall outside the limits of the Terms of Reference can be submitted after the signature or
approval of the Terms of Reference, unless authorised by the Tribunal (which shall also consider the nature of such new claims,
the stage of the arbitration and other relevant circumstances). The main difference, under the Expedited Procedure Provisions,
is that the trigger point is the constitution of the Tribunal rather than the signing of the Terms of Reference.
30-43
Thus, where the Expedited Procedure Provisions apply, claims not included in the Request for Arbitration or in the Answer (or
in any supplemental submission filed before the sole arbitrator gets appointed) will be considered as inadmissible except under
exceptional circumstances. Since there is a maximum amount above which the Expedited Procedure Provisions will no longer
automatically apply, and given the strict time limit to issue a final award, Tribunals will be reluctant to accept the submission of
new claims in such cases unless exceptional circumstances exist. In practice, the difficulty will be two-fold: determining what
circumstances qualify as exceptional in any given case and weighing the costs and benefits of a new claim’s admission. The
cost-benefit analysis will entail striking a balance between two situations. The first option the Tribunal will have is to allow
the new claim to be admitted, thereby prolonging the duration of the pending arbitration (which is not necessarily good for the
arbitrator’s reputation or for the ICC’s case duration statistics), but simultaneously avoiding the possibility of the new claim
being filed in a separate arbitration. The second option it will have is to reject the admission of the new claim, resulting in the
initiation of a new arbitration, resulting in higher cost and a longer duration (and where res judicata arguments may be raised).
Due process and fairness considerations will have to guide the Tribunal.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
