Section F. - Qualities Required in International Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638621...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section F. - Qualities Required in International Arbitrators
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 4 - Establishment and Organisation of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section F. - Qualities Required in International Arbitrators
(a) Introduction
4. 41
Choosing the right arbitral tribunal is critical to the success of the arbitral process. It is a very important choice, not only for the
parties to the dispute, but also for the reputation and standing of the process itself. It is, above all, the quality of the arbitrators
that makes or breaks an arbitration. The parties’ ability to select a ‘judge of their choice’ 61  is one of the distinguishing features
of arbitration as opposed to proceedings before the courts of law. It is important that this choice should be made wisely.
4. 42
In most arbitration systems, any natural person may be chosen to act as an arbitrator, the only general requirements being that the
person chosen must have legal capacity and be independent and impartial. Sometimes, however, parties to an arbitration will find
that this choice is limited by the restrictions placed on that choice by the clause, the institution, or the applicable statutory rules.
(b) Restrictions imposed by the contract
4. 43
Some standard forms of international contracts—particularly those used in the shipping and commodity trades, and the insurance
and reinsurance industries—identify the kind of arbitrator to be chosen in the event of a dispute. Some institutional rules
require that the arbitrator be nominated from a list held by that institution. 62  In general terms, it is not advisable to fix a list of
qualifications, since there may not be someone who both fulfils those criteria and is available to act as an arbitrator at the time
that the dispute arises, with the risk that the arbitral clause will be inoperable. For example, one author recalls a clause requiring
‘a native English speaker with experience in Brazilian law and the oil and gas industry’. Such detailed qualifications are rarely a
good idea: not only are they likely to cause delay in ascertaining whether or not a particular arbitrator comes within the criteria
but they may also create unnecessary additional grounds for an obstreperous losing party to challenge an unfavourable award
on the basis that the ‘composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the agreement of
the parties’. 63  It is also difficult to choose the qualifications of an arbitrator before the specific nature of the dispute is known.
Will a claim be large or small? Is it essentially a legal problem, or does it turn mostly on the facts, the technical aspects of a
specific industry, or the quantum of the claim? Is particular expertise required to evaluate the facts quickly and correctly? In
which language are the relevant documents? These questions need to be answered before the most suitable arbitrator(s) can be
chosen; ‘horses for courses’ is a rule that applies beyond the race track and is one best applied once the parties know the nature
of the dispute. The only restrictions that may be of use are those linked to fluency in the language of the contract (or the likely
language of the dispute) and, occasionally, on the residence or nationality of the arbitrators (with the aim of avoiding arbitrators
with the same nationality as one of the parties). 64
4. 44
If a potential arbitrator is confronted with specific criteria that have been included in a contract, it is good practice to obtain
a clear written confirmation from the parties at the beginning of the arbitral process that the criteria are considered fulfilled,
or a clear waiver that a particular requirement is no longer considered necessary. In this way, the arbitrator will avoid the risk

Section F. - Qualities Required in International Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638621...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
of the issue being later deployed by a party in proceedings seeking to annul the award or as a defence to enforcement of the
award if it has lost the arbitration. 65
(c) Restrictions imposed by the applicable law
4. 45
The most common (and reasonable) requirement imposed by national laws on the choice of an arbitrator is that of having legal
capacity. 66  The number of countries that impose other restrictions has decreased since the early editions of this work. Spain,
for example, repealed its former rule that the arbitrator must be a qualified lawyer where the dispute involves issues of law. 67
In 2012, Saudi Arabia removed the requirement that all arbitrators be male and have knowledge of Shari’ah law (although the
presiding arbitrator in a panel of three is still required to hold a university degree in Shari’ah law). 68
(d) Professional qualifications
4. 46
International disputes are too varied and numerous for it to be sensible to identify any general rule as to the kind of person who
should be chosen to act as an arbitrator. Parties must make up their own minds as to the qualifications that they require. The
most that can be done is to indicate some of the more important considerations.
(i) Sole arbitrator
4. 47
In international arbitrations before a sole arbitrator, it is usual to appoint a lawyer. Even where the dispute is relatively
simple, difficult problems of procedure and of conflict of laws may arise. These are problems that a lawyer with suitable
procedural and legal experience is generally better equipped to handle than a person whose expertise lies in another area. In
most international arbitrations, arbitrators are lawyers or professors of law. 69
(ii) Three arbitrators
4. 48
Where the arbitral tribunal is to consist of three arbitrators, at least one member of the arbitral tribunal (preferably the presiding
arbitrator) should be a lawyer, or at least a person who has considerable experience of acting as arbitrator in international
disputes, since someone will need to understand how to manage the arbitration and to drive it forward.
4. 49
There is no reason why the other members of the arbitral tribunal should also be lawyers, unless the issues involved are
principally complex issues of law. Part of the attraction of arbitration is the way in which the expertise necessary for the
understanding and resolution of the dispute may be found amongst the arbitrators themselves. For example, in disputes
involving matters of a technical nature, such as construction, quantum, or scientific issues, it may be appropriate that one (or
more) of the arbitrators be a civil engineer, an economist, or someone skilled in the technical matters at issue. 70
4. 50
However, if the presiding arbitrator is likely to be a lawyer, a party should consider carefully before nominating a technical
arbitrator in cases in which the other party has nominated a lawyer. This combination may result in the arbitral tribunal having
two lawyers who communicate fluently between themselves and a technical expert arbitrator with perhaps a more limited

Section F. - Qualities Required in International Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638621...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
interaction. 71  It may therefore be better tactically for the parties to seek to agree that, given the technical nature of a particular
dispute, each will appoint, say, an engineer or an economist, with a lawyer as the presiding arbitrator.
(e) Language
4. 51
Arbitrators must have an adequate working knowledge of the language in which the arbitration is to be conducted, so that they
can manage the procedure, understand the written and oral arguments of the parties, and be competent to draft an award in that
working language. Arbitrators should also be able to understand the language in which most of the written and oral evidence
is produced. Whilst English has generally been adopted as the working language of international commerce for contracts
between parties who speak different languages, the underlying documents and evidence will not always be in that language. If
an arbitrator is appointed who does not have a sufficient knowledge of the language of the evidence, it becomes necessary to
engage translators and interpreters to translate the evidence of the witnesses and the documents into a language that the arbitrator
concerned can understand. This circumstance may both affect the efficiency and increase the costs of the arbitration.
(f) Experience, diversity, and outlook
4. 52
In addition to choosing an arbitrator with appropriate knowledge of the relevant area of law, it is essential for parties to recognise
the importance of experience in international arbitration, particularly for a sole arbitrator or for the presiding arbitrator who is
usually solely responsible for the proper and effective control of the proceedings. The sole or presiding arbitrator may have to
perform this function against the background of differences of culture and legal training on the part of the parties and particularly
of their counsel. At the same time, the proceedings must maintain their momentum and not be allowed to sink into a quagmire
of procedural disputes. There may be language problems, both in relation to communications between members of the arbitral
tribunal and in the reception of evidence. A timetable and procedure must be set for the various steps of the arbitration (including
presentation of submissions, production of documents, exchange of witness statements and expert reports, and rules for the
final hearing), as well as dealing with logistical and administrative matters, including the unique challenges of remote hearings,
which are becoming more common. These are all tasks that call for skill and, above all, experience in the practice of international
arbitration.
4. 53
Careful thought should therefore be given to the experience or outlook of an arbitrator. Relevant questions to assess whether
a particular candidate may be the right choice include: Will the person be organised and efficient? Will the person have
enough availability? What is his or her ability to handle procedural issues? Does he or she have sufficient knowledge of the
applicable substantive law? Is he or she likely to be a consensus builder? What kind of approach does he or she have to damages
calculation issues? What is the candidate’s approach to technology (for example, can they work with electronic pleadings and
documents) and can they conduct remote virtual hearings efficiently? 72  Many of these questions can be answered only by
experienced practitioners familiar with the community of international arbitrators. New data collection platforms also provide
useful information on potential candidates, such as their language capabilities, bar admissions, workload, rendered decisions,
and publications. 73
4. 54
The need to renew the corps of international arbitrators with a more diverse younger generation often creates a tension with
the ‘tried and tested’ group of older white arbitrators. As already noted in Chapter 1, 74  there have been several initiatives
focused on ensuring that female arbitrators have an equal opportunity of being nominated including the ‘Equal Representation
in Arbitration’ pledge. 75  The Pledge is a private initiative created by members of the arbitration community in 2015, which
seeks to ‘increase, on an equal opportunity basis, the number of women appointed as arbitrators in order to achieve a fair
representation as soon practically possible, with the ultimate goal of full parity’. The Pledge’s website also provides assistance in
the search for female arbitrators. Another important initiative has been the establishment of ‘Arbitral Women’, an international

Section F. - Qualities Required in International Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638621...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
non-governmental organisation (NGO) bringing together female arbitration practitioners. 76  These efforts to encourage female
arbitrators were followed by the launch of the non-profit organisation ‘Racial Equality for Arbitration Lawyers’ (REAL) in
2021. 77  These initiatives were preceded in the 1990s by ‘Young Arbitration Practitioner’ groups established under the auspices
of many of the principal arbitral institutions 78  to enable a younger and more diverse group of arbitrators to be identified. As
a consequence, diversity in the nomination and appointment of arbitrators has improved and is likely to continue doing so
although it still has a long way to go. But diversity is not simply a box to tick in the consideration of arbitrator candidates.
The energy and fresh perspective that such candidates can bring often results in more efficient proceedings and better-prepared
arbitrators. It is thus important when considering the identity of potential candidates, to consider carefully suitably qualified
female candidates, younger candidates, and those from varying racial backgrounds.
(g) Availability
4. 55
Some of the most experienced international arbitrators are also the busiest and their consequent lack of availability can result
in significant delays in convening hearings and rendering awards. 79  Indeed, ascertaining a prospective arbitrator’s availability
before making an appointment may be as important in ensuring an efficient and effective process as establishing his or her
experience. The ICC, for example, requires all prospective arbitrators to disclose the number of cases in which they are sitting
as co-arbitrator or chairperson, as well as the number of cases in which they are acting as counsel, and to confirm that they have
adequate availability to discharge their mandate, when they complete their ‘statement of acceptance, availability, impartiality
and independence’. 80  This allows either party to make objections based on perceived lack of availability, and the ICC may
refuse to confirm appointments on this basis. Additionally, the ICC Rules provide that the ICC Court must take into consideration
the diligence and efficiency of the arbitrator, the timeliness of the award, among other factors, in setting the arbitrator’s fees. 81
Again by way of example, the LCIA Rules require arbitrator candidates to confirm that they are ‘ready, willing and able to
devote sufficient time, diligence and industry to ensure the expeditious and efficient conduct of the arbitration’. 82  The ICSID
Rules also require arbitrators to disclose their availability. 83
(h) Nationality
4. 56
In an ideal world, the country in which the arbitrator was born or the passport that he or she carries should be irrelevant. The
qualifications, experience, and integrity of the arbitrator should be the essential criteria. It ought to be possible to proceed in
the spirit of the Model Law which provides simply: ‘No person shall be precluded by reason of his nationality from acting as
an arbitrator, unless otherwise agreed by the parties.’ 84  Nevertheless, in the interests of the perception of neutrality, the usual
practice in international arbitration is to appoint a sole arbitrator (or a presiding arbitrator) of a different nationality from that
of the parties to the dispute.
4. 57
The validity of nationality limitations on arbitrator appointments, which are found in most institutional rules, was cast into doubt
following a ruling of the English Court of Appeal in Jivraj v Hashwani. 85  The Court found that arbitrators are ‘employed’ by
the parties and therefore subject to employment equality laws that made ‘nationality’ restrictions illegal. In a welcome reversal,
however, the UK Supreme Court subsequently confirmed that arbitrators are not ‘employees’ of the parties and therefore not
subject to such employment equality laws. 86
4. 58
The current practice under most institutional rules is that the sole or presiding arbitrator will almost certainly be someone of a
different nationality from that of the parties to the dispute. Article 6.7 of the UNCITRAL Rules, for example, provides that:

Section F. - Qualities Required in International Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638621...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
The appointing authority shall have regard to such considerations as are likely to secure the appointment of an
independent and impartial arbitrator and shall take into account as well the advisability of appointing an arbitrator
of a nationality other than the nationalities of the parties. 87
4. 59
Similarly, Article 30 of the CIETAC Rules lists ‘the nationalities of the parties’ as one of several considerations for appointment.
4. 60
Article 12.4 of the ICDR Rules takes a slightly different approach, whilst broadly embracing the same principle:
In making appointments, the Administrator shall, after inviting consultation with the parties, endeavour to appoint
suitable arbitrators, taking into account their availability to serve. At the request of any party or on its own
initiative, the Administrator may appoint nationals of a country other than that of any of the parties.
4. 61
Article 13.5 of the ICC Rules goes further and provides that the ‘sole arbitrator or president of the arbitral tribunal shall be of
a nationality other than those of the parties. 88  The provision allows an exception ‘in suitable circumstances and provided that
none of the parties objects’. In a similar vein, Article 6.1 of the LCIA Rules provides:
Where the parties are of different nationalities, a sole arbitrator or the presiding arbitrator shall not have the same
nationality as any party unless the parties who are not of the same nationality as the arbitrator candidate all agree
in writing otherwise.
(i) Education and training
4. 62
As noted above, the most important qualification for an international arbitrator is experience in the law and practice of arbitration.
There is no sense in appointing an experienced lawyer as sole or presiding arbitrator responsible for advancing the process if
that experience does not include practical experience of arbitration. The reputation and acceptability of international arbitration
depends upon the quality of the arbitrators themselves. The task of presiding over an international arbitral tribunal is no less
skilled than that of a surgeon conducting an operation, or a captain in charge of the safe navigation of a ship. It should not be
entrusted to someone with no first-hand experience of it.
4. 63
It follows that there should be some recognised and effective process by which practitioners can acquire the necessary skills
to eventually become arbitrators. Young students sometimes get their first exposure to arbitration by participating in university
moot court competitions. In order to ensure that there is continuity between generations, most arbitral institutions and law firms
operate internship schemes under which young lawyers and post-graduate students gain practical experience for a period of
several months.
4. 64
In addition, some arbitral institutions now run training programmes specifically designed for prospective arbitrators. 89  Also,
as noted above, many arbitral institutions have established ‘young practitioner’ groups that enable the younger members of the
arbitration practitioner community to meet each other, thus creating a network of future potential arbitrators. 90

Section F. - Qualities Required in International Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638621...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
(j) Interviewing prospective arbitrators
4. 65
Clients will generally ask their external counsel to suggest arbitrators suitable for the particular dispute. Indeed, this is a key role
for external counsel, based on their experience of the candidates. The individuals suggested are then discussed with the client,
usually by focusing on the particular skill-set and perspective that each candidate would bring to the dispute. A joint decision
is then usually taken as to which arbitrators should be contacted to establish interest, availability, and absence of conflicts of
interest.
4. 66
Whilst clients tend to trust their external counsel with the selection of suitable candidates, some may wish to meet and interview
the individual or individuals concerned. This practice is not objectionable, with the caveat that it is engaged in openly and that
the scope of the discussion is appropriately restricted. A prospective arbitrator may be asked about potential conflicts of interest
and if so, given the names of the parties and counsel involved in the proceedings. It is to be expected that the candidate will be
questioned on his or her experience, availability, and knowledge of the business sector. The client and counsel will also take
the opportunity to assess the candidate’s physical and mental health. However, there should be no attempt to ascertain (directly
or indirectly) the prospective arbitrator’s views on the substantive or procedural issues that are expected to arise in the case. 91
4. 67
In recent years, such interviews have become rarer. They are usually awkward in nature, since external counsel will either know
the candidate personally or at least will know about the candidate’s experience and ability. In fact, what the client usually wants
to know is the candidate’s likely opinion on the merits of its case. Indeed, there would be questions as to the impartiality and
independence of an arbitrator who, in a pre-appointment interview with a party, expressed views, even hypothetically, on the
merits of the case. Experienced counsel thus tend to advise against such interviews; and the client will usually be content to
rely on counsel’s own knowledge of the group of potential candidates.
4. 68
If such interviews do take place, one experienced US arbitrator has identified guidelines which are communicated to the
interviewers in advance. First, other than in exceptional circumstances, the interviewers must travel to the office of the arbitrator
(that is, he will not respond to a ‘summons’ to the premises of the party concerned or their representaives). 92  Second, the
interviewing delegation must be led by an external lawyer retained by the party in question (that is, the arbitrator will not see
the party’s employees alone). Third, the meeting should not be conducted over lunch or other event involving hospitality—
regardless of who will pay the bill. Fourth, the arbitrator will take a note of the discussion that he will regard as disclosable to
interested parties if appropriate. And fifth, if appointed, the arbitrator will inform the arbitrator nominated by the other party of
both the fact and the content of the discussion with the party that appointed him. These are sensible guidelines that should avoid
any real risk of impropriety—and prospective arbitrators would be wise to adopt a similar system, or to adapt them in a way
that seems appropriate to the circumstances of individual cases. 93  More difficult is the question of interviewing prospective
sole or presiding arbitrators in cases in which the arbitration agreement calls for the appointment to be made by agreement
between the parties. Again, there can be no objection in principle, provided that both parties’ representatives are present and
the discussion is carefully controlled.
Footnotes
61
See fn. 39.
62
For instance, under the ICSID Convention, if the Chair of the Administrative Council is to appoint the arbitrator(s) he
or she must appoint from the Panel of Arbitrators held by the Centre. The parties to the dispute are not subject to such
restriction. See ICSID Convention, Art. 40. See also AAA Rules, Arts 3 and 12.
63
See Model Law, Art. 32(2)(a)(iv).

Section F. - Qualities Required in International Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638621...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
64
In this regard, see the discussion of the English courts’ decisions in Jivraj v Hashwani on the validity of nationality
limitations on arbitrator appointments, at paragraph 4.57.
65
For example, on the basis that the arbitral tribunal was not constituted in accordance with the agreement of the parties:
see New York Convention, Art. V(1)(d). See also Model Law, Art. 34(2)(a)(iv).
66
See for instance the French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1451.
67
Spanish Arbitration Act 2003, s. 13, repealing the 1988 Act, s. 12(2).
68
Saudi Arabia’s new arbitration law came into force in July 2012. The new Arbitration Regulation (Royal Decree
No. M/34) is based on the principles of the Model Law and has significantly modernised the pre-existing law in
many respects, including in the requirements of arbitrators: see Harb and Leventhal, ‘The new Saudi Arbitration Law:
Modernization to the tune of Shari’a’ (2013) 30 J Intl Arb 113.
69
For a view on the varied profiles of arbitrators in investment arbitration, which regularly includes retired diplomats,
migrating commercial arbitrators, and former judges, see van den Berg, ‘Qualified investment arbitrators?’, in Wautelet,
Kruger, and Coppens (eds) The Practice of Arbitration: Essays in Honour of Hans van Houtte (Hart Publishing, 2012),
p. 54.
70
For instance, in the Indus Waters Kishenganga (Pakistan v India) arbitration brought before the PCA, which involved
complex hydrogeological issues, one of the arbitrators appointed was Professor Howard S. Wheater FREng, an
expert in hydrological science and water resource management (PCA Case No. 2011-01). In this regard, a 2016
survey reports that the commercial understanding of the industry sector is the most important factor in nominating
arbitrators for technology, media, and telecoms disputes, followed by knowledge of the law applicable to the contract/
arbitration. See Pinsent Masons and Queen Mary University of London, ‘Pre-empting and Resolving Technology,
Media and Telecoms Disputes’, p. 33, available online at http://www.arbitration.qmul.ac.uk/media/arbitration/docs/
Fixing_Tech_report_online_singles.pdf.
71
Even when all of the arbitrators are lawyers, the parties can and should ensure that the technical aspects of the dispute
are well understood, by submitting the reports of technical experts.
72
See Rogers and Brodlija, ‘Arbitrator appointments in the age of COVID-19’, in Scherer, Bassiri, and Wahab (eds)
International Arbitration and the COVID-19 Revolution (Kluwer Law International, 2020), pp. 58-59.
73
See, for instance, the databases offered in the websites of Arbitrator Intelligence, Global Arbitration Review, Jus
Mundi, International Arbitration Institute Paris, and the Equal Representation in Arbitration Pledge. See also Rogers
and Brodlija, fn. 72, pp. 60–62.
74
See Chapter 1, paragraphs [1.34–1.35].
75
More information on the Equal Representation in Arbitration (ERA) Pledge is available online at http://
www.arbitrationpledge.com/about-the-pledge. The efforts to achieve diversity in international arbitration should of
course include regional and racial considerations.
76
See https://www.arbitralwomen.org/.
77
The website of REAL is at https://letsgetrealarbitration.org/.
78
The first ‘Young International Arbitration Group’ was established by the LCIA in 1997 and was the brainchild of Johnny
Veeder KC. Its origins are discussed online at https://www.lcia.org/News/lcia-perspectives-yiag.aspx. This has since
been followed by the ICC ‘Young Arbitrators Forum’, Institute for Transnational Arbitration’s ‘Young ITA’, ICDR’s
‘Young & International’, the Swiss Arbitration Association’s ‘Below 40’ Group, and ‘Young ICCA’, RAI—Rising
Arbitrators Initiative, among others. Also, a recent trend in various jurisdictions is the creation of associations of ‘very
young arbitration practitioners’.
79
This is another reason, when appointing arbitrators, to look beyond the ‘usual suspects’ and towards a younger, more
diverse (and usually more available) group of candidates.
80
The latest version of the statement was introduced in January 2021 and is sent by the ICC to arbitrators to complete when
they are appointed. The statement requires arbitrators to confirm their acceptance of the relevant appointment, their
ability to ‘devote the time necessary to conduct [the] arbitration throughout the entire duration of the case as diligently,
efficiently and expeditiously as possible in accordance with the time limits in the Rules’, and the number of pending
cases in which they are involved as arbitrators and counsel. The arbitral community has highlighted the merits of self-
discipline in managing caseload and work. See Reed, ‘The David Caron Rule of X’ (2019) 37 BJIL 163. In an extreme
case, the ICC may remove arbitrators who fail to get on with their task.
81
ICC Rules, Appendix III, Art. 2.2.
82
LCIA Rules, Art. 5.4.
83
ICSID Rules, r. 19(3)(b).
84
Model Law, Art. 11(1).
85
Jivraj v Hashwani [2011] 1 WLR 1872.

Section F. - Qualities Required in International Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638621...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
86
Jivraj v Hashwani [2011] UKSC 40. More generally, this decision upholds the principle of party autonomy in the
selection of arbitrators, since the Court refused to use public policy to fetter the parties’ freedom to agree what qualities
and attributes their arbitrators should have. The judgment is discussed in depth in Style and Cleobury, ‘Jivraj v Hashwani:
Public interest and party autonomy’ (2012) 27 Arb Intl 563.
87
Emphasis added.
88
Emphasis added.
89
The CIArb, headquartered in London, and other institutions offer specialised programmes to train future arbitrators.
90
See fn. 78.
91
Parties can agree in advance to adhere to specific guidelines during interviews, e.g. CIArb’s Guidelines on Interviews
for Prospective Arbitrators (last revised 30 August 2016). The Draft Code of Conduct for Adjudicators in Investor–
State Dispute Settlement also contains a rule on pre-appointment interviews, providing that they should be limited to
discussion concerning expertise, experience, availability, and absence of conflict (Art. 7). This Draft Code was prepared
by the Secretariats of ICSID and UNCITRAL in 2020 (and updated in 2021). The Code is intended to provide applicable
principles and provisions addressing matters such as independence and impartiality, and the duty to conduct proceedings
with integrity, fairness, and efficiency. The drafters have explained that it is based on a comparative review of standards
found in investment treaties, arbitration rules and rules of international courts. See 2020 version, p. 3.
92
Nowadays, such interviews would rarely be conducted in person and would almost certainly take place by
videoconference.
93
See CIArb’s Guidelines on Interviews for Prospective Arbitrators and IBA Guidelines on Party Representation,
guidelines 7 and 8. See also Bishop and Reed, ‘Practical guidelines for interviewing, selecting and challenging party-
appointed arbitrators in international commercial arbitration’ (1998) 4 Arb Intl 395.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
