Case Management Techniques, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407037 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Case Management Techniques
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Case Management Techniques
24-10
The case management conference is also intended to provide an occasion to discuss, if need be, any of the case management
techniques described in App.IV of the Rules which reads as follows:
“The following are examples of case management techniques that can be used by the arbitral tribunal and the
parties for controlling time and cost. Appropriate control of time and cost is important in all cases. In cases of
low complexity and low value, it is particularly important to ensure that time and costs are proportionate to what
is at stake in the dispute.
 
a)Bifurcating the proceedings or rendering one or more partial awards on key issues, when doing so may
genuinely be expected to result in a more efficient resolution of the case.
 
b)Identifying issues that can be resolved by agreement between the parties or their experts.
 
c)Identifying issues to be decided solely on the basis of documents rather than through oral evidence or legal
argument at a hearing.
 
d)Production of documentary evidence:
 
(i)requiring the parties to produce with their submissions the documents on which they rely;
 
(ii)avoiding requests for document production when appropriate in order to control time and cost;
 
(iii)in those cases where requests for document production are considered appropriate, limiting such
requests to documents or categories of documents that are relevant and material to the outcome of the
case;
 
(iv)establishing reasonable time limits for the production of documents;
 
(v)using a schedule of document production to facilitate the resolution of issues in relation to the
production of documents.
 
e)Limiting the length and scope of written submissions and written and oral witness evidence (both fact
witnesses and experts) so as to avoid repetition and maintain a focus on key issues.
 
f)Using telephone or video conferencing for procedural and other hearings where attendance in person is not
essential and use of IT that enables online communication among the parties, the arbitral tribunal and the
Secretariat of the Court.
 
g)Organising a pre-hearing conference with the arbitral tribunal at which arrangements for a hearing can be
discussed and agreed and the arbitral tribunal can indicate to the parties issues on which it would like the
parties to focus at the hearing.
 
h)Settlement of disputes:

Case Management Techniques, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407037 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(i)encouraging the parties to consider settlement of all or part of the dispute either by negotiation or
through any form of amicable dispute resolution methods such as, for example, mediation under the
ICC ADR Rules;
 
(ii)where agreed between the parties and the arbitral tribunal, the arbitral tribunal may take steps to
facilitate settlement of the dispute, provided that every effort is made to ensure that any subsequent
award is enforceable at law.”
24-11
The list in App.IV is a checklist of elements that may, at some stage of the proceedings, be relevant. However, where experienced
counsel are involved, they will be familiar with these techniques and will have considered them without the assistance of the
Tribunal. Most experienced Tribunals are very familiar with the above techniques and the issues that they raise.
For example, with respect to (a) bifurcation, there is frequently, as discussed below, a trade-off between bifurcating a specific
claim and deciding the case as a whole if the bifurcated issue is not dispositive of the case. With respect to (b) it is now standard
practice to at least consider the possibility of having experts meet to seek to agree on issues between them and to identify the
reasons as to which they differ on other issues. With regard to (c), there are issues that may be capable of resolution based
on documents only. However, this type of approach is generally only suitable for smaller cases or for specific and discrete
issues, such as, for instance, jurisdiction. With regard to (d) it is standard practice to use a Redfern schedule for documentary
requests and to seek to limit documentary production to issues that the Tribunal considers material and relevant to the case. In
this respect the IBA Rules on Evidence are a key reference point. With regard to (e), practices diverge with respect to limitations
on the length of submissions. In the authors’ view such limitations are only appropriate in smaller cases prior to the evidentiary
hearings but perfectly acceptable for post-hearing briefs. With regard to (f), in the authors’ experience, unless counsel is located
in the same city as the Tribunal, case management conferences are generally carried out by telephone or video conference.
This tendency has been reinforced by the desire to hold such case management conferences promptly after transmittal of the
file to the Tribunal and even more so by the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic. With regard to (g), it is standard practice to
hold a pre-hearing conference. In the authors’ view it would only be in smaller cases that the Tribunal would seek to orient the
issues to be dealt with at the main evidentiary hearings. However, if there is an issue that has not been dealt with in the parties’
submissions, the Tribunal may and should raise it. With regard to (h), counsel is well aware of the possibility of settlement and
the Tribunal should be wary of being seen to seek to avoid to deal with its responsibility, which is to decide the case according
to applicable law.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
