Proof of law; the Tribunal’s right to raise legal issues on..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Proof of law; the Tribunal’s right to raise legal issues on its own
initiative
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Proof of law; the Tribunal’s right to raise legal issues on its own initiative
21-54
The application of rules of law to the merits under art.21 raises two additional issues. The first issue is whether the Tribunal
should raise legal issues on its own initiative. The second issue is how the applicable rules of law should be proven.
21-55
Given the general provision in art.42 that the Tribunal shall “make every effort to ensure that the award is enforceable at law”, it
is possible, although apparently infrequent, for a Tribunal to raise issues of mandatory law that would affect the enforceability of
the award. However, in doing so, the Tribunal must respect the requirements of due process discussed under art.22. In particular,
if a Tribunal comes to the conclusion that a mandatory rule of law should be dealt with in the award and the parties have not
made submissions as to that law, it should provide the parties with an opportunity to comment on this aspect of law. Generally
speaking, this would appear true for any legal provision, including its application by way of analogy, which the parties did not
have an opportunity to raise. Often, this will simply be the case because they had not even thought about it. By the time the
Tribunal comes to consider that a given legal provision should apply, it will have engaged in the deliberation process. At that
point, the proceedings have normally been closed. 158
21-56
As regards the proof of law, there is no set practice in ICC arbitration. In many instances, issues of national law will be argued by
the lawyers who represent the parties. Unlike in state court proceedings, there is no requirement in ICC arbitration that foreign
law be proven by expert evidence or other means as a question of fact. In many other cases, however, the parties will submit
legal opinions with respect to matters of national law. 159  Most international arbitrators are experienced in various legal systems
and therefore are quite flexible as to how the relevant rules of law are addressed in the proceedings. 160
Footnotes
158
2012 Secretariat's Guide, para.3-769 also cautions arbitrators to rely on the principle of iura novit curia, which they
consider to be an undesirable approach in international arbitration.
159
Kaufmann-Kohler, “The Arbitrator and the Law: Does He/She Know It? Apply It? How? And a Few More
Questions” (2005) Arb. Int. Vol.21 No.4, p.631; “’Iura Novit Arbiter’—Est- ce bien raisonnable? Réflexions sur le statut
du droit de fond devant l’arbitre international » in De Lege Ferenda—Réflexions sur le droit désirable en l’honneur du
Professeur Alain Hirsch (Editions Slatkine, 2004), p.71.
160
For a discussion see Capper, Ljungstroem and Dépinay, “‘Proving’ the Contents of Applicable Substantive Laws”,
Dossier of the ICC Institute of World Business Law: The Application of Substantive Law by International Arbitrators
(2014) 31.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
