Document 4.2: 2017 & 2021 Rules—Expedited Procedure..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Document 4.2: 2017 & 2021 Rules—Expedited Procedure ICC
Arbitrator Atatement of Acceptance, Availability, Impartiality
and Independence
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part II - Models, Precedents and Examples
Document 4.2: 2017 & 2021 Rules—Expedited Procedure ICC Arbitrator Atatement of Acceptance, Availability,
Impartiality and Independence 1
CASE N° ...............
II-4. 2
Family Name(s): ....................
Given Name(s): ....................
Please tick all relevant boxes.
1. Acceptance
Acceptance
◯ I accept to serve as arbitrator under and in accordance with the ICC Rules of Arbitration (“Rules”). (i) I confirm that
I am familiar with the Rules and in particular with the Expedited Procedure Provisions. (ii) I accept that my fees will be
fixed exclusively by the ICC Court (Article 2(4) of Appendix III to the Rules) and my expenses paid pursuant to the Note
to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration (“Note”). (iii) I
acknowledge that my name, nationality, role, the method of my selection and the termination of my assignment will be
published on the ICC Court’s website, unless otherwise agreed by the parties. (iv) I also acknowledge that my award(s) and
procedural order(s) may be published pursuant to the Note. The processing operations under (iii) and (iv) are necessary for
the purposes of legitimate interests pursued by the parties, arbitrators and the public in accessing transparent information
about ICC Arbitration to assist them in their decision making, and in pursuing their legitimate interests and fundamental
procedural rights through arbitration. I can object to the publication if my interests and fundamental rights and freedoms
override such legitimate interests.
Non-Acceptance
◯ I decline to serve as arbitrator in this case. (If you tick here, simply date and sign the form without completing any other
sections.)
2. Availability
□ I confirm, on the basis of the information presently available to me, that I can devote the time necessary to conduct this
arbitration under the Expedited Procedure Provisions throughout the entire duration of the case as diligently, efficiently
and expeditiously as possible in accordance with the time limits in the Rules, subject to any extensions granted by the Court
pursuant to Articles 3(3) and 4(1) of the Expedited Procedure Provisions. I understand that it is important to complete
the arbitration as promptly as reasonably practicable and that the ICC Court will consider the duration and conduct of the
proceedings when fixing my fees (Article 2(2) of Appendix III to the Rules). My current professional engagements are as
below for the information of the ICC Court and the parties.
Number of currently pending cases in which I am involved (i.e. arbitrations and activities pending now, not previous
experience; additional details you wish to make known to the ICC Court and to the parties in relation to these matters
can be provided on a separate sheet):

Document 4.2: 2017 & 2021 Rules—Expedited Procedure..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
As tribunal chair /
sole arbitrator
As co-arbitrator
As counsel
Arbitrations
Court litigation
Not applicable
Not applicable
I have marked in the annexed calendar for the next 8 months all currently scheduled hearings and other existing
commitments that would prevent me from sitting in a hearing on this matter.
I have further marked in the box below or on a separate sheet any other relevant information regarding my availability.
3. Independence and Impartiality
(Tick one box and provide details below and/or, if necessary, on a separate sheet)
In deciding which box to tick, you should take into account, having regard to Article 11(2) of the Rules, whether there
exists any past or present relationship, direct or indirect, whether financial, professional or of any other kind, between
you and any of the parties, their lawyers or other representatives, or related entities and individuals. Any doubt must be
resolved in favour of disclosure. Any disclosure should be complete and specific, identifying inter alia relevant dates (both
start and end dates), financial arrangements, details of companies and individuals, and all other relevant information. In
deciding which box to tick and as the case may be in preparing your disclosure, you should also consult with care the
relevant sections of the Note.
◯ Nothing to disclose: I am impartial and independent and intend to remain so. To the best of my knowledge, and having
made due enquiry, there are no facts or circumstances, past or present, that I should disclose because they might be of such
a nature as to call into question my independence in the eyes of any of the parties and no circumstances that could give
rise to reasonable doubts as to my impartiality.
◯ Acceptance with disclosure: I am impartial and independent and intend to remain so.
However, mindful of my obligation to disclose any facts or circumstances which might be of such a nature as to call into
question my independence in the eyes of any of the parties or that could give rise to reasonable doubts as to my impartiality,
I draw attention to the matters below and/or on the attached sheet.
Use one of the following options to sign the document:
 
1) Copy your signature from a Word document and paste it in this form.
 
2)Draw your ink signature (click here for further assistance).
 
3) Add your electronic signature.
 
4) Print the form, sign it and scan it.
Date:
..........
Signature:
..........
Disclaimer: Your personal data is collected by ICC as data controller, for the purpose of conducting ICC proceedings. You
have the right to access, rectify, erase, the right to portability of your personal data, the right to restrict and object the
processing, by sending an email to dataprotection@iccwbo.org or writing to the International Chamber of Commerce, ICC

Document 4.2: 2017 & 2021 Rules—Expedited Procedure..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
DPO, 33-43 avenue du Président Wilson 75116 Paris, France. For further information about this processing, please visit
the ICC Data Privacy Notice for ICC Dispute Resolution Proceedings page.
Footnotes
1
© International Chamber of Commerce (ICC). Reproduced with kind permission of ICC. The text reproduced here is
valid at the time of reproduction in July 2021. As amendments may be made to the text, please refer to the website
https://iccwbo.org/dispute-resolution-services for the latest version and for more information on ICC dispute resolution
services. Also available in the ICC Digital Library at http://library.iccwbo.org.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
