Limited submissions and document disclosure process, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406946...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Limited submissions and document disclosure process
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Limited submissions and document disclosure process
30-46
Pursuant to art.3(4) of App.VI, the Tribunal shall have discretion to adopt such procedural measures as it considers appropriate.
The language sounds familiar to practitioners of ICC arbitration, although it is not identical with the one of art.22(2) of the Rules.
Under that latter provision, the Tribunal’s discretion is to be exercised: (i) “in order to ensure effective case management”; and
(ii) after consulting the parties, but expressly limited by (iii) any agreement of the parties to the contrary. While repeating the
purpose of effective case management was indeed not necessary, and while it seems clear that in practice a Tribunal will always
consult the parties before adopting procedural measures, the deletion of the reference to the parties’ agreement to the contrary
seems questionable. It may be explained by the second sentence of art.3(4) of App.VI, which states that:
“[i]n particular, the arbitral tribunal may, after consultation with the parties, decide not to allow requests for
document production or to limit the number, length and scope of written submissions and written witness evidence
(both fact witnesses and experts).”
30-47
Thus, it would seem that it may be enough for the Tribunal to give the parties an opportunity to state their views, but that it
would not be bound by a joint request of the parties (and thus their agreement) to have, for instance, a hearing (and not just
documents) or to have two rounds of written submissions (instead of a single round).
30-48
ICC arbitrations involving “small” claims and thus conducted on an expedited basis may lead to requests for document
disclosure, significant detailed written submissions and the need to discharge the burden of proof by submitting fact witness
and/or expert evidence. Seeking to limit or even ban requests for document disclosure, limiting the number, length and scope
of written submissions and written witness evidence will invariably lead to tensions with at least one of the parties. It will
argue that such limitations conflict with its fundamental right to present its case and are contrary to due process. 669  However,
by accepting the ICC Rules and not excluding the application of the Expedited Procedure Provisions for their claims, parties
cannot reasonably raise due process arguments at a later stage when confronted with the application of the said rules, absent
extraordinary circumstances.
30-49
An experienced arbitrator should be in a position to have the parties adopt “reasonable” positions, so that the “small claims”
arbitrations may be conducted “in an expeditious and cost-effective manner, having regard to the complexity and value of the
dispute,” as commanded by art.22(1) of the Rules.
30-50
As mentioned above, given the time constraints to complete expedited arbitration proceedings, there may be one single exchange
of written submissions on the merits following the case management conference allowing the claimant to reply to the Answer
to the Request for arbitration and the respondent to rebut the claimant’s reply brief. In case of a counterclaim, Tribunals may
need to mandate the simultaneous submissions of the claimant and counter-claimant.
30-51
Limiting the length and scope of submissions is a practice often discussed in connection with post-hearing briefs, but rather
rare with respect to pre-hearing briefs. For the Tribunal and the parties to find common ground, in particular when only one

Limited submissions and document disclosure process, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406946...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
round of written pleadings is foreseen, may be challenging. The imposition of a page-limit by the Tribunal may be viewed as
arbitrary and unfair, even in an expedited procedure. In reality, however, parties will have limited time to submit their written
submissions, which in itself limits the ability to make lengthy written submissions. The sole arbitrator will need to address
the issue of the length of submissions with certain care, by looking at the specific circumstances of the case. The decision to
curtail the length of the parties’ submissions. 670  Such a decision may be counterproductive, if it prevents the presentation of
arguments or evidence which could be useful for deciding the case. Parties will no doubt prefer to present their case without
having to comply with limits on the length and scope of submissions. Claimants will argue that since they do not know what
the other side’s defence arguments will be, it needs to cover all points. Brevity of its submission is then not to be expected.
Footnotes
669
Numerous examples of due process arguments are mentioned by Trappe, “The Arbitration Proceedings: Fundamental
Principles and Rights of the parties”, (1998) J. Int. Arb. Vol.15 No.3, p.98. On that subject see also Ferguson Reed,
“Ab(use) of due process: sword vs shield”, [2017] Arb. Int. Vol.33 No.3 pp.361–377; Metsch & Gerbay, “Prospect
Theory and due process paranoia: what behavioural models say about arbitrators' assessment of risk and uncertainty”,
[2020] Arb. Int. Vol.36 No.2 pp.233–252; Sharma, “Due Process “Paranoia”: Turning Away from Judicial Attitudes and
Looking for Answers Within”, [2018] Int. J. Arb. Mediation & Dispute Resolution Vol.84 No.4 pp.314–325; Cremades
Sanz Pastor, “The Use and Abuse of “Due Process” in International Arbitration”, [2016] Arbitraje: Revista de Arbitraje
Comercial y de Inversiones Vol.9 No.3 pp.661–676; Polkinghorne & Ainsley Gill, “Due Process Paranoia: Need We Be
Cruel to Be Kind?”, [2017] J. Int. Arb. Vol.34 No.6 pp.935–946.
670
The party making submissions in a foreign language, which is so often the case in international arbitration may be at a
true disadvantage here. Being a native language speaker helps in making concise and precise submissions.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
