Section D. - Enforcement under Regional Conventions, UKBC-REDFERN 530638675...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section D. - Enforcement under Regional Conventions
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 11 - Recognition and Enforcement of Arbitral Awards
Section D. - Enforcement under Regional Conventions
(a) Middle Eastern and North African Conventions and enforcement
regimes
11. 139
The Riyadh Arab Agreement on Judicial Cooperation, known as the ‘Riyadh Convention’, entered into force in 1985, has twenty
signatory states, and provides for the enforcement in one signatory state of an award rendered in another signatory state. 223
Importantly, however, and unlike the New York Convention, the Riyadh Convention requires that, to enforce an award made
in another Arab country, leave to enforce must be obtained in the country in which the award was made. 224  In the same way,
the Agreement on the Execution of Rulings, Requests of Legal Assistance and Judicial Notices, entered into by the Gulf Co-
operation Council in 1995 and known as the ‘GCC Convention’, 225  has the same requirement, and while it does not specifically
refer to arbitral awards, it is considered applicable to them. 226
11. 140
States in this region have also entered into regional investment agreements—notably, the Agreement for Promotion, Protection
and Guarantee of Investments, entered into by the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation member states and thus known as
the ‘OIC Agreement’, 227  and the Unified Agreement for the Investment of Arab Capital in the Arab States, entered into
by the member states of the Arab League (hence the ‘Arab League Investment Agreement’). 228  These agreements provide
for the settlement of investor–state disputes by international arbitration. If an arbitral award rendered under the Arab League
Investment Agreement is not implemented, or if the parties fail to resort to arbitration, or the tribunal fails to render an award
within a prescribed period of time, the dispute shall be heard by a permanent Arab Investment Court. The decisions of arbitral
tribunals under the OIC Agreement and of the Arab Investment Court under the Arab League Agreement are, like ICSID
awards, enforceable as though they were final and enforceable decisions of national courts of the state in which enforcement
is sought. 229
11. 141
The enforcement regime in the United Arab Emirates has attracted much attention in recent years. The United Arab Emirates is
a civil law jurisdiction, but to promote business it has established two autonomous, English-speaking, common law ‘off-shore’
jurisdictional enclaves, namely the Dubai International Financial Centre (DIFC) and the Abu Dhabi Global Market (ADGM).
These ‘off-shore’ jurisdictions have their own civil and commercial laws, including their own arbitration laws based on the
Model Law. The former Chief Justice of the DIFC courts was a leading Singaporean international arbitrator, Dr Michael Hwang,
who described the DIFC as ‘a common law island in a civil law ocean’. 230
11. 142
In a notable series of judgments from 2014 to 2016, the DIFC courts held that, under the DIFC arbitration law, the DIFC could
be used as a so-called ‘conduit jurisdiction’ for the enforcement of arbitral awards in the on-shore United Arab Emirates, given
the automatic recognition of DIFC judgments in the rest of the United Arab Emirates. 231  This was so even in circumstances
where the award debtor had no presence or assets in the DIFC itself. This, in effect, allowed award creditors to bypass the often
uncertain and lengthy process of enforcing arbitral awards directly in the on-shore United Arab Emirates, which in turn led to
a clash of jurisdictions between the off-shore DIFC courts and the on-shore United Arab Emirates regimes. In light of this, in
June 2016, the Ruler of Dubai established the Dubai–DIFC Joint Judicial Committee responsible for determining conflicts of

Section D. - Enforcement under Regional Conventions, UKBC-REDFERN 530638675...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
jurisdiction between the on-shore Dubai courts and the DIFC courts. 232  The Joint Judicial Committee, which comprises four
on-shore judges and only three DIFC judges, has since handed down a number of decisions that favoured the jurisdiction of the
on-shore Dubai courts, thereby gradually curtailing the award creditors’ ability to use the DIFC courts as a ‘conduit jurisdiction’
to enforce arbitral awards in the on-shore United Arab Emirates. 233
11. 143
In addition to the DIFC courts, the DIFC–LCIA Arbitration Centre was established in 2008 as a joint venture between the DIFC
and the LCIA to administer arbitration proceedings under its own rules. On 20 September 2021, the Ruler of Dubai issued
Decree No. (34) of 2021 dissolving the DIFC–LCIA Arbitration Centre (and the Emirates Maritime Arbitration Centre) and
transferring their staff and their assets to the Dubai International Arbitration Centre (DIAC) with a new arbitration court to be
established. 234  It remains to be seen whether this and other changes will impact the enforceability of awards in the United
Arab Emirates.
(b) Panama Convention
11. 144
In January 1975, following the Inter-American Conference on Private International Law in Panama, the Panama Convention was
signed by twelve South American states. 235  The Convention represented a significant shift away from former Latin American
hostility towards international arbitration, as reflected in the Calvo doctrine. 236
11. 145
The Panama Convention recognises an agreement to submit existing or future disputes to arbitration, 237  and it also provides
for the reciprocal enforcement of arbitral awards in member states as if the award were a judgment of a court in the place of
enforcement:
An arbitral decision or award that is not appealable under the applicable law or procedural rules shall have the force
of a final judicial judgment. Its execution or recognition may be ordered in the same manner as that of decisions
handed down by national or foreign ordinary courts, in accordance with the procedural laws of the country where
it is to be executed and the provisions of international treaties. 238
The Convention speaks of ‘execution’ of an award rather than ‘enforcement’, but in practice there is no difference.
11. 146
Recognition and execution of an award may be refused, at the request of the party against which it is made, only if that party is
able to prove to the competent authority of the state in which recognition and execution is sought that one of the five grounds
for refusal laid down in Article 5(1) of the Panama Convention applies. Those five grounds closely follow the five grounds set
out in Article V(1) of the New York Convention, and include: (i) incapacity, or invalid arbitration agreement; (ii) no proper
notice of appointment of arbitrator or of the proceedings, or lack of due process; (iii) lack of jurisdiction; (iv) composition of
arbitral tribunal or procedure not in accordance with arbitration agreement or the relevant law; and (v) award not yet binding
on the parties, or annulled or suspended at the seat of arbitration. 239  In the same way, and following Article V(2) of the New
York Convention, under Article 5(2) of the Panama Convention, recognition and execution of an award may also be refused if
the competent authority of the state in which recognition and execution is sought, finds that: the subject matter of the dispute
cannot be settled by arbitration under the law of that state; or that recognition or execution of the decision would be contrary
to the public policy (‘ordre public’) of that state. 240
11. 147
Where an application has been made to annul or suspend the award, the authority before which recognition and execution is
sought may, 241  under the Panama Convention, postpone its decision; at the request of the party seeking execution, it may also
instruct the other party to provide appropriate guarantees. 242

Section D. - Enforcement under Regional Conventions, UKBC-REDFERN 530638675...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
11. 148
It is evident that the Panama Convention was strongly influenced by the provisions of the New York Convention. Indeed,
many of the provisions of the former have been copied more or less word for word from the latter. According to one informed
commentator, the Panama Convention nevertheless has had ‘a tremendous and vital significance’. 243  Certainly, whether because
of the Convention or because of other influences—such as the Model Law—arbitration is becoming a more acceptable way
of settling disputes in Latin America.
(c) Moscow Convention
11. 149
The Moscow Convention was signed on 26 May 1972, the original signatories being those Eastern Bloc states that were grouped
together under the leadership of the Soviet Union in the now defunct Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (known in
English as the Comecon). Now that the German Democratic Republic has ceased to exist and Poland, the Czech Republic, and
Hungary have withdrawn, it applies only to Bulgaria, Cuba, Mongolia, Romania, and Russia, although there is little evidence
of any current usage.
11. 150
The Convention regulates the settlement by arbitration of disputes ‘resulting from economic and scientific-technical
cooperation’ within the member states. It provides that arbitration awards ‘shall be final and binding’, 244  and they are to be
‘voluntarily’ enforced by the parties, failing which they may be enforced in the same way as final decisions made in the courts
of the country of enforcement. 245  Enforcement proceedings must be brought within two years of the date of the award, and
the three grounds of refusal of enforcement closely parallel those in the New York Convention—namely, lack of jurisdiction,
denial of a fair hearing, and when the award has been set aside. 246
(d) Other regional conventions
11. 151
This review of various regional conventions is not intended to be exhaustive. Parties or lawyers who are concerned with the
recognition and enforcement of arbitration agreements or arbitral awards would be well advised to consider whether there are
any regional conventions that may be both relevant and helpful.
Footnotes
223
The following countries are signatories to the Riyadh Convention: Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, UAE,
and Yemen.
224
See Riyadh Convention, Art. 37.
225
The following countries are party to the GCC Convention: Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE.
226
GCC Convention, Art. 7.
227
The following countries have ratified the OIC Agreement: Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Egypt, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Palestine, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, and the UAE. The following countries have
signed but not yet ratified the OIC Agreement: Afghanistan, Albania, Bangladesh, Benin, Comoros, Cote d’Ivoire,
Djibouti, Guinea-Bissau, Malaysia, Niger, Nigeria, Sierra-Leone, Tajikistan, and Yemen.

Section D. - Enforcement under Regional Conventions, UKBC-REDFERN 530638675...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
228
The following countries are party to the Arab League Agreement: Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria
(temporarily suspended at the time of writing), Tunisia, UAE, and Yemen.
229
OIC Agreement, Art. 17(d); Arab League Agreement, Art. 34(3).
230
See Hwang, ‘The courts of the Dubai International Finance Centre—A common law island in a civil law ocean’, in
Selected Essays in Dispute Resolution (Academy Publishing, 2018), p. 51.
231
See, e.g., Banyan Tree Corporate PTE Ltd v Meydan Group LLC (Claim No: ARB-003-2013) and DNB Bank ASA v
Gulf Eyadah (Claim No: CA-007-2015).
232
Dubai Decree No. 19 of 2016, ‘Concerning the establishment of a Judicial Tribunal for the Dubai Courts and DIFC
Courts’.
233
See, e.g., Daman Real Capital Partners Company LLC v Oger Dubai LLC (Cassation No. 1/2016), where the Joint
Judicial Committee ruled that the DIFC courts should ‘cease to entertain’ an action to enforce an award rendered in on-
shore Dubai because of the existence of parallel annulment proceedings in the on-shore Dubai courts. In Gulf Navigation
Holding P.S.C v Jinhai Heavy Industry Co. Limited (Formerly Zhoushan Junhaiwan Shipyard Co Ltd) (Cassation
No. 1/2017), the Joint Judicial Committee went a step further and ordered the DIFC courts to cease entertaining the
enforcement of a foreign arbitral award, on the basis that the award creditor had filed a new claim related to the same
contract in dispute before the Amicable Settlement of Disputes Centre of the Dubai courts.
234
The Dubai government’s media release can be found online at https://mediaoffice.ae/en/news/2021/September/18-09/
Mohammed-bin-rashid
235
The text of the Convention appears in (1978) III YBCA 15 and in (1975) 14 ILM 336. See also Blackaby, Lindsey, and
Spinillo (eds) International Arbitration in Latin America (Kluwer Law International, 2002), pp. 3-6. The Convention
came into effect in the United States on 27 October 1990.
236
At time of writing, nineteen states had ratified this Convention, including the United States: see online at http://
www.oas.org/juridico/english/sigs/b-35.html. For a commentary on US participation, see Lowry, ‘The United States
joins the Inter-American Arbitration Convention’ (1990) 7 J Intl Arb 83.
237
Panama Convention, Art. 1. Unlike the New York Convention, however, it does not deal with the problem of enforcing
an arbitration agreement if one of the parties takes court proceedings notwithstanding the agreement to arbitrate.
238
Panama Convention, Art. 4.
239
Panama Convention, Art. 5(1).
240
Panama Convention, Art. 5(2).
241
Panama Convention Art. 6.
242
This provision follows the New York Convention, Art. V(I).
243
Norberg, ‘General introduction to inter-American commercial arbitration’ (1978) III YBCA 1, at 13.
244
Moscow Convention, Art. IV(1).
245
Moscow Convention, Art. IV(2).
246
Moscow Convention, Art. V(1).
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
