Challenge of Emergency Arbitrator, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406929 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Challenge of Emergency Arbitrator
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Challenge of Emergency Arbitrator
29-45
The Emergency Arbitrator Rules provide in art.3 for a separate regime for challenging an Emergency Arbitrator. Article 14 of
the Rules does not apply in that respect. The Emergency Arbitrator may be challenged by either party within three days from
the notification of the appointment by the Secretariat pursuant to art.3(1) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules.
29-46
The ICC Court, not its President, will decide upon any such challenge. It will do so after having received submissions from the
Emergency Arbitrator and the parties. This is the normal procedure regarding challenges of arbitrators under art.14 of the Rules.
Normally, the ICC Court examines challenges against arbitrators at its monthly sessions, but in recent years also at its weekly
Committee Sessions and Annex II now provides for Special Committees and Single-Member Committees. 569  In all likelihood,
the challenge against an Emergency Arbitrator will be brought before a Court’s Special or Single-Member Committee, since
it would not be consistent with the urgency of a request for Emergency Measures to await a Special Committee Session or, in
some instances, a weekly Committee Session. Unless the challenge is manifestly unfounded, a Special Committee would seem
preferable, as at least three members of the ICC Court would be examining the challenge. To increase the impartiality of the
process, it would also seem advisable that the person who made the appointment of the Emergency Arbitrator, i.e. the President
or a Vice-President of the ICC Court, abstain from deciding the challenge. In the first 80 Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings,
four challenges were made, all of which were dismissed. 570
29-47
As will be further discussed below, the challenge brought against an Emergency Arbitrator has no suspensive effect. It does not
bring the proceedings to a standstill and the Emergency Arbitrator continues to enjoy the power to issue an Order, as long as
the ICC Court has not decided upon the challenge. 571
Footnotes
569
See para.1-77 as to the different Committees of the ICC Court.
570
Commission Report on Emergency Arbitration, Annex I, Part C.
571
See para.29-96.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
