Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 5 - Powers, Duties, and Jurisdiction of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators
(a) Introduction
5. 06
The powers of an arbitral tribunal are those conferred upon it by the parties within the limits allowed by the applicable law, 7
together with any additional powers that may be conferred automatically by operation of law. These powers are established to
enable the arbitral tribunal to carry out its task properly and effectively.
5. 07
In a well-conducted international arbitration, control of the proceedings moves smoothly from the parties to the arbitral tribunal.
At first, the parties are fully in charge. They alone know the issues in dispute, how they intend to set about proving the facts
upon which they rely, and the arguments of law that they propose to advance. The case that is to be put to the arbitral tribunal is
‘their’ case. Indeed, the arbitral tribunal owes its very existence to the parties: it is ‘their’ tribunal. As the proceedings develop,
however, the arbitral tribunal becomes increasingly familiar with the matters in dispute. It begins to decide for itself which facts
it regards as relevant and which questions of law it regards as important. It is in a position to start making known its views as
to how the case should be presented within the framework of the particular rules that govern the proceedings. The balance of
power, in effect, shifts from the parties to the arbitral tribunal. It is right that this should be so: the arbitrators, not the parties,
are the final judges of the matters in dispute. However, this shift in the balance of power happens only if the arbitrators know
when and how to take charge of the proceedings and understand the tools at their disposal.
(b) Sources of arbitrators’ powers
(i) Powers conferred by the parties
5. 08
The parties may confer powers upon the arbitral tribunal directly or indirectly, but only within the limits of the applicable
law. Any excess of power (that is, any power granted over and above that allowed by the applicable law) is invalid, even if
it is contained in international or institutional rules of arbitration.
5. 09
A ‘direct’ conferment of powers takes place when the parties agree expressly upon the powers that they wish the arbitrators
to exercise, possibly by setting them out in the terms of appointment or a submission agreement. Such powers are likely
to include the powers to order production of documents, to appoint experts, to hold hearings, to require the presence of
witnesses, to receive evidence, and to inspect the subject matter of the dispute. The ways in which these powers may be
expressly conferred upon the arbitral tribunal in submission agreements have been described in more detail in Chapter 2. 8
5. 10

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
An ‘indirect’ conferment of powers takes place when the parties have agreed that the arbitration is to be conducted according
to pre-established rules of arbitration that set out the powers of the tribunal. In the case of the ICC, some of these powers are
conferred on the ICC’s International Court of Arbitration itself. For example, the place of arbitration is determined by the
ICC Court, unless it has been chosen by agreement of the parties. 9
(ii) Powers conferred by operation of law
5. 11
The powers conferred upon an arbitral tribunal by the parties, whether directly or indirectly, fall short of the powers that may
be exercised by a national court. Such courts derive their authority from the state, which grants to them formidable coercive
powers to ensure obedience to their orders. An arbitral tribunal does not usually possess such powers. 10  The parties cannot
confer upon a private tribunal the coercive powers over property and persons that are conferred by the state on a national
court. In recognition of this fact, many systems of law supplement the powers of arbitral tribunals by:
 
•giving powers directly to arbitral tribunals;
 
•authorising national courts to exercise powers on behalf of arbitral tribunals; or
 
•a combination of these two methods.
5. 12
An example of procedural powers being conferred on an international arbitral tribunal by law is provided by the English
Arbitration Act 1996. The tribunal is given various powers, including the powers to order a claimant to provide security for
costs, 11  to administer oaths to witnesses, 12  and generally to determine procedural matters. 13
5. 13
In practice, the best approach when considering the powers of an arbitral tribunal is to look first at the arbitration agreement
(including any applicable institutional rules that may be incorporated within the agreement), then at the law governing the
arbitration agreement, and finally at the law governing the arbitration (if different). The arbitration agreement should be
considered to establish what powers the parties themselves have agreed to confer on the arbitral tribunal. In general, those
powers are set out in the rules to which the arbitration has been subjected. The law governing the arbitration agreement
should then be considered to identify how those powers may have been supplemented or restricted. The law of the arbitration
agreement, which governs its validity, effect, and interpretation, may confer specific powers (or impose certain limitations)
upon the arbitral tribunal. 14  Finally, if different, the law governing the arbitration itself, the lex arbitri, should be similarly
considered. An example of such a restriction is an arbitration agreement governed by English law, but which provides for the
arbitration to take place in Paris. The arbitration agreement might include an express provision that the arbitrator is entitled
to administer oaths to any witnesses in the arbitration. French law, however, does not permit a private individual, such as an
arbitrator, to administer oaths. 15  This is a mandatory provision of French law which, as the law governing the arbitration,
would override the express or implied provisions of the arbitration agreement.
(c) Common powers of arbitral tribunals
(i) Establishing the arbitral procedure
5. 14
In general terms, the arbitral tribunal enjoys a very broad power to determine the appropriate procedure. Indeed, this is one
of the defining features of arbitration as opposed to courts, in which a fixed procedure exists. It is, however, subject to an
overarching respect of due process or natural justice—that is, equality of treatment and an opportunity to be heard. One
example of this dichotomy is provided by Article 17.1 of the UNCITRAL Rules which contains a general power for the
arbitral tribunal to ‘conduct the arbitration in such manner as it considers appropriate, provided that the parties are treated

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
with equality and that at an appropriate stage of the proceedings, each party is given a reasonable opportunity of presenting
its case’. 16
(ii) Determining the applicable law and seat
5. 15
Parties sometimes fail to address important matters in the arbitration agreement, such as the seat of the arbitration or the
applicable law. In case this happens, and in order to prevent the parties’ agreement to arbitrate becoming inoperative, the
arbitral tribunal (and, in some cases, the arbitral institution) is usually provided with the power to determine the seat 17  and
the applicable rules of law. 18  Such important decisions will normally be made only once both parties have had an opportunity
to be heard on the issue. 19  The determination of the seat or place of arbitration by an institution or by the arbitral tribunal
is important, since it will determine the lex arbitri and consequently establish a state jurisdiction to supervise the arbitration.
It is common practice for arbitral tribunals in these circumstances to establish a seat in a jurisdiction that is a signatory to
the New York Convention (for recognition and enforcement purposes) and which has an established reputation as a seat in
international disputes.
(iii) Determining the language of the arbitration
5. 16
Where the language of the arbitration is not established by the arbitration agreement and the institutional rules do not provide
for determination of this question, the arbitral tribunal must determine the language(s) to be used in the proceedings. 20
Usually, tribunals fix the language of the arbitration as that of the underlying contract, since this is most likely to be the
‘common’ language of the parties. 21  However, where the parties have used two working languages in negotiations (or have
authentic versions of the contract in two languages), the tribunal may order a bilingual arbitration in which two languages
may be used interchangeably by the parties, with or without the need for translation or interpretation. Bilingual arbitrations
are also commonly ordered in investment arbitrations where a sovereign state insists on presenting its case in its own language
whereas the international investor may often prefer English.
(iv) Requiring the production of documents
5. 17
Where a party has requested production of specific, or a narrow category of, documents by the other party and that party
has raised objections, the arbitral tribunal will usually receive a request for an order requiring such production. If the arbitral
tribunal concludes that the document or category of documents is indeed relevant to the resolution of the dispute, it has the
power to order production. 22  In the event that the requested party does not produce the ordered documents, the tribunal has
no power (imperium) to force production, but may nevertheless ‘draw adverse inferences’ from such failure or (in French
law) impose a financial penalty. 23  A further limitation is that this power may not be exercised by the tribunal against non-
parties to the arbitration. 24
5. 18
The law of the place of arbitration may provide supplementary state powers to assist the tribunal. For example, in a tribunal
with a seat in the United States, the tribunal may issue a subpoena requiring a person present within the jurisdiction to produce
documents. However, the arbitral subpoena can be enforced by a court of the state in which the arbitration is taking place
only against a person resident or present within the jurisdiction of that court. 25

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
(v) Requiring the presence of witnesses/subpoenas
5. 19
The arbitral tribunal has the power to require the presence of witnesses under the control of the parties. However, absent any
powers to call upon the forces of public order, if such a witness fails to appear, the arbitral tribunal is again (as with a failure
to produce documents) usually limited to drawing adverse inferences from the party’s failure to secure the presence of the
witness; and once again, the tribunal’s powers may be supplemented by the law governing the proceedings (lex arbitri) by
providing judicial support to the enforceability of orders. For example, in England and Wales, a party may seek a peremptory
order from the tribunal requiring the attendance of a witness in the power of a party which, if disobeyed, may be followed by
a court order in support. If the court order is disobeyed, it is a contempt of court, which may lead to a criminal prosecution. 26
In the United States, using the same subpoena procedure outlined above for documents, an arbitral subpoena can be issued in
respect of a third-party witness present in the jurisdiction of the state in which the arbitration is to take place. In Switzerland,
a tribunal may also obtain court assistance for the taking of evidence, such as compelling a witness to appear. 27
(vi) Examining the subject matter of the dispute
5. 20
Where the dispute concerns the state or condition of the subject matter of the contract, such as a cargo of goods or defects
in a particular structure in a construction project, it may be useful for the tribunal to see for itself the cargo or the structure
in question. A tribunal usually has this power under relevant institutional rules 28  or national laws. The possibility of a ‘site
visit’ is also addressed in the 2020 International Bar Association Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Arbitration
(the IBA Rules). 29  Such visits need to be carefully planned in advance, with appropriate protocols in place. The tribunal will
usually make the site visit in the presence of the parties and any relevant party or tribunal-appointed experts.
(vii) Appointing experts
5. 21
Many rules of arbitration permit the tribunal to appoint its own expert. 30  The IBA Rules make specific provision for this
possibility and establish useful ground rules for such appointment. 31  Where questions of technical expertise are required
in an international arbitration, whether arising out of liability or quantum issues, it is usual for the parties to present expert
reports from independent experts retained for the purpose. 32  It is then for the tribunal to weigh and compare the value of
that expert testimony, in order to reach a conclusion. Sometimes, the evidence of the experts is of such technical complexity
that the tribunal has difficulty in reaching a decision. At other times the instructions given to the party-appointed experts may
differ and the experts fail properly to engage with the adverse party’s case. The tribunal may then (after consultation with
the parties) decide to seek assistance itself from a neutral expert, either at the outset of a technically complex case or at a
later stage, to assist in evaluating the technical evidence.
5. 22
If the tribunal decides to exercise this power, it is better done sooner rather than later. However, typically the need for an
independent expert only becomes clear after the tribunal has received the reports of party-appointed experts and (in some
cases) after those experts have been heard at a final hearing. 33  Best practice suggests that, wherever possible, the appointment
should be made before the final hearing, so that the expert can be present during the oral testimony of the party-appointed
experts.
5. 23
When an arbitral tribunal exercises its power to appoint an expert, it will usually seek the views of the parties on the
qualifications of the independent expert and the proposed terms of reference which will set out the scope of the exercise,

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
with a list of specific questions and issues to consider (on which the parties should be allowed to comment). The questions
should be limited to those that require technical expertise and should not delegate any legal question. The tribunal will then
usually establish a shortlist of candidates and ask the parties to confirm the absence of conflicts. Once appointed, the expert
will review the evidence in the case and respond to the questions raised by the tribunal in a draft report which should include
the methodology and evidence used to arrive at the conclusions. This should then be circulated to the parties for comment.
Once comments are received, the expert should prepare a final report and be made available for oral examination by the
parties and the tribunal on that report. 34
5. 24
A possible variation from this practice would be for the tribunal to appoint two experts, one chosen from each of two lists
provided by the parties. This ‘expert team’ would then provide the tribunal with a single report on the relevant technical issues,
based on a single set of questions established in consultation between the arbitrators and the parties. 35  ‘Expert teaming’ helps
to correct the danger of a lone tribunal-appointed expert by requiring two tribunal-appointed experts to work in tandem. By
having some input on the choice of one of the experts, parties should feel that they have not lost all control in the selection
process. At the same time, the short-list system imposes an incentive on parties to put forward truly independent experts
whom a tribunal would be more likely to select.
5. 25
It is important to note that the final report of the tribunal’s expert(s) is simply another evidentiary element for the arbitral
tribunal to consider in its deliberations. It is not binding on the tribunal. The tribunal should not delegate its obligation to
reach its own decision on expert issues in dispute through the appointment of an independent expert. 36
(viii) Interim measures
5. 26
During the course of an arbitration, it may become necessary for the arbitral tribunal or a national court to issue orders intended
to preserve evidence, to protect assets, to respect procedural rights, and otherwise to maintain the status quo pending the
outcome of the arbitration proceedings. 37  Such orders take different forms and are known by different names. In the Model
Law and in the UNCITRAL Rules, they are known as ‘interim measures’; 38  in the English version of the ICC Rules, they
are known as ‘conservatory and interim measures’. 39  Whatever their designation, they are intended to operate as holding
orders to protect the status quo and the integrity of the proceedings, pending the outcome of the arbitral process. Most major
institutional rules now empower arbitral institutions to appoint ‘Emergency Arbitrators’ for the purpose of providing rapid
interim relief before the constitution of a tribunal. 40  An emergency arbitrator usually enjoys the same powers as the definitive
tribunal to order interim relief—but once constituted, the arbitral tribunal may review that relief. 41
5. 27
Where interim measures of protection are required, the arbitral tribunal itself generally has the power to order them. For
example, Article 28.1 of the ICC Rules provides that ‘the Arbitral Tribunal may, at the request of a party, order any interim
or conservatory measure it deems appropriate’. There are similar provisions in many arbitration rules. 42  The same powers
are usually provided for in arbitration laws. For example, Article 17 of the Model Law (as amended in 2006) states, ‘[u] nless
otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal may, at the request of a party, grant interim measures’.
5. 28
The ICSID Rules are different, in that they appear to limit the power of the arbitral tribunal to that of ‘recommending’ interim
measures:
A party may at any time request that the Tribunal recommend provisional measures to preserve that party’s
rights, including measures to: (a) prevent action that is likely to cause current or imminent harm to that party
or prejudice to the arbitral process; (b) maintain or restore the status quo pending determination of the dispute;
or (c) preserve evidence that may be relevant to the resolution of the dispute. 43

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
5. 29
The use of the word ‘recommended’ in this context stems from the concern of the drafters of the ICSID Convention to be
respectful of national sovereignty by not granting powers to private tribunals to order a state to do, or not do, something on a
purely provisional basis. Arbitral jurisprudence, however, indicates that these measures do constitute binding obligations. 44
As confirmed by the tribunal in Valle Verde v Venezuela, 45  it is now ‘well settled’ that ICSID tribunal decisions recommending
provisional measures are binding on the party to whom they are directed.
5. 30
Whilst most rules and laws of arbitration permit interim measures to be granted at the tribunal’s discretion, they provide little
guidance as to how that discretion should be exercised. Traditionally, arbitrators have looked to concepts common to most
legal systems in the granting of such measures—such as the need to establish a prima facie case on the merits and the risk of
serious and irreparable harm if the measure is not granted. Recent ICSID jurisprudence suggests that provisional measures
are ‘extraordinary measures’, which are recommended in only limited circumstances, such as when such measures are urgent
and necessary to avoid imminent and irreparable harm. 46
5. 31
The lack of guidance in many jurisdictions on the applicable test for interim measures was addressed in the revised Model
Law of 2006. Article 17A (‘Conditions for granting interim measures’) sets out the applicable test as follows:
 
(1)The party requesting an interim measure under article 17(2)(a), (b) and (c) shall satisfy the arbitral tribunal that:
 
(a)Harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely to result if the measure is not ordered, and such
harm substantially outweighs the harm that is likely to result to the party against whom the measure is directed if
the measure is granted; and
 
(b)There is a reasonable possibility that the requesting party will succeed on the merits of the claim. The
determination on this possibility shall not affect the discretion of the arbitral tribunal in making any subsequent
determination.
[ … ]
This test follows earlier arbitral practice. It confirms that the key elements to take into account are: (a) the risk of irreparable
harm, if the order is not granted; (b) that the harm to the requesting party, if the order is not granted, will be greater than the
harm to the other party if it is granted (the ‘balance of convenience’ test); and (c) that the requesting party has a reasonable
chance of success on the merits (that is, a prima facie case).
5. 32
In most jurisdictions, an arbitral tribunal has the power to issue interim measures provided that both parties are heard (thereby
preserving one of the cornerstones of due process). Problems arise, however, when one party seeks to obtain interim measures
ex parte—that is, in the absence of the opposing party or parties. Institutional rules sometimes authorise the tribunal to grant
ex parte interim measures under ‘exceptional circumstances’, subject to the opposing party’s right to be heard promptly
following the grant of any order. 47  However, some commentators have suggested that such a power is incompatible with the
consensual nature of arbitration and with proper respect for due process. 48
5. 33
Article 17B of the revised Model Law sets out a compromise, which provides for emergency relief in the form of a ‘preliminary
order’. This can be requested on an ex parte basis simultaneously with the request for interim relief. A preliminary order is
subject to a twenty-day time limit, pursuant to Article 17C(4), and the same conditions apply as for interim measures. Within
that twenty-day period, an application may be made to the arbitral tribunal, on notice to the other party, to adopt or vary the
preliminary order. In addition, a preliminary order may be granted on an ex parte basis if the arbitrator decides that disclosure
of the request for interim relief would frustrate the purpose of the measure (for example because the opposing party might
seek to hide or remove relevant assets). Article 17C(5) provides that a preliminary order of emergency relief, whilst binding
on the parties, is not enforceable by a court. 49

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
(ix) Security for costs
5. 34
Security for costs is a special form of interim relief, to which the criteria outlined above do not apply. It is an order which
seeks to protect the enforceability of an eventual adverse costs order made against an unsuccessful claimant. It is therefore
based on the premise that international arbitral tribunals will order the losing party to pay the costs of the winning party. Such
costs orders are increasingly frequent in international arbitration but are by no means universal, particularly in the field of
investment arbitration where tribunals recognise that some areas of the law are sufficiently in flux that it is reasonable that
a successful party should be required to bear its own costs.
5. 35
The point has already been made that the costs of presenting or defending a claim in an international arbitration may run into
millions of dollars. 50  Where a claimant considers launching arbitral proceedings, this is—or should be—one of the factors
to be taken into account. But what about the respondent, who has no such luxury of choice? If there is a valid arbitration
agreement to which the respondent is a party, that respondent may decide not to take part in the proceedings; but if it does so,
it runs a very real risk of having a default award made against it that is likely to be enforceable against its worldwide assets. 51
5. 36
Whilst a decision to defend the proceedings is usually the safer option, it comes at a considerable cost. Not only will the
respondent have to pay its own legal costs, but it will generally be required to make a substantial advance payment towards
the fees and expenses of the arbitral tribunal and, in an institutional arbitration, of the institution under whose rules the
proceedings are being conducted. If the respondent is ultimately successful, an award of costs will generally be made in its
favour, which will go some way towards repaying the costs actually incurred. However, this will be of no consolation to the
respondent if it transpires that the claimant does not have sufficient funds to meet an award of costs against it. The classic
example is where a contract is signed with a ‘special purpose’ vehicle (or shell company) with few assets. If the special
purpose vehicle brings a claim, it is likely to be funded by its shareholder. That shareholder will benefit from the claim of its
subsidiary if successful. However, if the subsidiary loses, it will have insufficient assets to pay a costs award in favour of the
respondent and the shareholder (who would have benefited from a victory) will not be liable.
5. 37
In this circumstance, an application for security for costs may be made by a respondent to protect against the risk that the
tribunal may make an order for costs in its favour against an impecunious claimant. In such cases, the tribunal must weigh
the risk to a successful respondent of being unable to recover its costs against an unsuccessful claimant versus the risk of
stifling a genuine claim by a claimant who is short of funds, possibly because of the very conduct of the respondent that
has given rise to the arbitration.
5. 38
If the application is successful, the consequences are important. First, the respondent will know that if it defends the claim
successfully and is awarded costs, there will be a mechanism in place (often a bank guarantee or an escrow account) to ensure
payment; secondly, if the claimant is unable to provide the requisite security, the proceedings will come to an end. 52
5. 39
Historically, applications for costs in international arbitrations were rarely granted, no doubt because in many civil law
jurisdictions (and the United States) adverse costs orders in the courts for material amounts in favour of the winning
respondent are rare. 53  In an early commentary on the ICC Rules, the authors agreed that an application for security for
costs as an interim measure was possible, despite there being no specific provision in the rules for such an application. The
authors said that: 54
Many considered it undesirable to call attention to its availability or to suggest that it was a normal interim
measure. The remedy is considered by many to be inappropriate in most circumstances for ICC arbitrations.

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
5. 40
As the burden of costs increases, this historical antipathy to applications for security for costs is changing, particularly in
common law jurisdictions. For example, the laws of arbitration of England, Hong Kong, and Singapore explicitly provide
for orders for security for costs. Further, as adverse costs orders become more commonplace, institutional rules of leading
arbitral institutions have embraced the concept, including those of the LCIA, SIAC, HKIAC, and the Belgian Centre for
Arbitration and Mediation (CEPANI). 55  Article 25.2 of the LCIA Rules, for example, confers upon an arbitral tribunal the
power to order a claimant or counter-claimant ‘to provide or procure security for Legal Costs and Arbitration Costs by way
of deposit or bank guarantee or in any other manner and upon such terms as the Arbitral Tribunal considers appropriate in
the circumstances’. Under other rules of arbitration, including those of UNCITRAL, ICC, and ICSID, security for costs is
not addressed separately but may be ordered under the general provision that authorises an arbitral tribunal to issue interim
measures of protection. 56
5. 41
The issue of whether or not to order security for costs is more delicate in investment arbitration than it is before commercial
arbitrators because it may have been the very action of the respondent state that has caused the impecuniosity of the claimant.
For example, where a claimant’s principal producing asset (e.g. a mine) has been seized by a host state without compensation,
the claimant may wish to bring a claim under an applicable investment treaty. However, the very action of the host state
has stifled the ability of the affected claimant to fund the arbitration. In such cases, affected investors often look to third-
party funding to provide access to justice (that is, where its legal costs are paid in whole or in part by a professional funder,
who will usually be repaid only in the event of success). The respondent state is usually aware that the claim is funded since
some rules (and most tribunals) require the revelation of the existence of funding (and the identity of the funder) for conflicts
purposes. 57  The respondent state may use this information to claim that the use of funding is evidence of impecuniosity and
thus seek security for costs in respect of the claim.
5. 42
In Guaracachi and Rurelec v Bolivia, 58  the tribunal was circumspect about this argument, noting:
As a factual matter, the Respondent has not shown a sufficient causal link such that the Tribunal can infer from
the mere existence of third-party funding that the Claimants will not be able to pay an eventual award of costs
rendered against them, regardless of whether the funder is liable for costs or not.
5. 43
Investment arbitration tribunals have so far rarely granted security for costs. Indeed, out of nearly seventy known applications
filed since 1984, only four requests for security for costs have been granted in investment arbitrations brought under the
ICSID, ICSID Additional Facility, and UNCITRAL Rules. 59  This restrained approach is reflected by the comments of the
annulment committee noted in Commerce Group v El Salvador, who observed that ‘the power to order security for costs
should be exercised only in extreme circumstances, for example, where abuse or serious misconduct has been evidenced’. 60
The handful of cases in which respondents have successfully obtained security for costs tend to reflect unique circumstances
such as repeated failure to pay advances on costs in similar cases 61  or an inability to demonstrate solvency to the satisfaction
of the tribunal. 62
5. 44
One means for a funded claimant to protect itself in such circumstances from a security for costs order is through the
subscription by the claimant (or its funder) of adverse costs insurance (known as ATE or ‘after the event’ insurance) which
will pay any such order. Since the existence of this insurance provides the very guarantee that a respondent will be seeking
in a security for costs order, it renders the granting of such an order unlikely.
(x) Power to sanction counsel
5. 45

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
Following concerns about the increased abuse by counsel of certain procedural tools with which to delay arbitrations, cause
hearings to be annulled, or otherwise frustrate an efficient process, one arbitral institution (the LCIA) has introduced the
power to sanction counsel. 63  This permits the tribunal to exercise its discretion to issue a written reprimand or caution as to
future conduct in the arbitration, or to take any other measure necessary to fulfil its general duties if counsel:
 
•engages in activities intended unfairly to obstruct the arbitration or to jeopardise the finality of any award, including
repeated challenges to an arbitrator’s appointment or to the jurisdiction or authority of the tribunal known to be unfounded
by counsel;
 
•knowingly makes any false statement to the tribunal or the LCIA Court;
 
•knowingly procures or assists in the preparation of, or relies upon, any false evidence presented to the tribunal or the
LCIA Court; or
 
•knowingly conceals or assists in the concealment of any document ordered to be produced by the tribunal.
(xi) Ordering remote hearings
5. 46
One of the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic for the world of international arbitration was a sudden rise in the number
of hearings conducted remotely. 64  This increase in remote proceedings has led to the question of whether tribunals have the
power to order remote hearings even over a party’s objections, or whether they risk ‘due process’ and set-aside challenges for
doing so. The predominant view is that arbitration-friendly jurisdictions will respect a tribunal’s discretion to order remote
hearings, subject to certain fundamental procedural safeguards. This is evidenced by national reports commissioned by the
International Council for Commercial Arbitration (ICCA). According to these ICCA reports, no jurisdiction’s lex arbitri
contains an express provision setting out a right to a physical hearing, which implies that arbitrators can indeed order a
remote hearing if the circumstances so require. 65  In the Netherlands, for example, the lex arbitri expressly provides for
the possibility of conducting remote hearings, subject to procedural safeguards; 66  similarly, the Austrian Supreme Court
confirmed a tribunal’s power to hold remote hearings over one party’s objections and rejected due process concerns. 67
Arbitral institutions have taken steps to update their rules to provide expressly for the use of remote hearings. Notably,
the LCIA and ICC have refined and expanded their provisions on virtual or hybrid (semi-virtual) hearings, removing any
ambiguities as to their feasibility and empowering tribunals to order them over a party’s opposition. 68
5. 47
The move towards remote proceedings not only affords participants greater flexibility and convenience but also, by
eliminating the need for long-distance flights and voluminous hard copies, can also help to reduce international arbitration’s
significant carbon footprint. According to the Campaign for Greener Arbitrations, nearly 20,000 trees could be required to
offset the total carbon emissions resulting from a single arbitration. 69
(d) Supporting powers of the courts
5. 48
National courts with an ‘arbitration-friendly’ law can usually lend support to arbitral tribunals, where needed. The United States,
for example, provides a formidable array of tools to enable courts to assist international arbitral tribunals, including, in some
cases, arbitral tribunals with seats outside of the United States, where relevant evidence is in the United States. These include
the power to order depositions, the power to subpoena witnesses present in the jurisdiction to give evidence or to produce
documents, and the power to order production of documents sought by a party to an arbitration with a foreign seat. 70
5. 49

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
Another example is provided by the English system, in which the court can act as a ‘backup’ to the arbitration by ordering a party
to comply with any peremptory order made by the tribunal. 71  This effectively converts the breach of the tribunal’s order into
a contempt of court. A court can also assist a tribunal by making its own orders in relation to the proceedings. 72  These include
orders freezing a party’s assets, 73  orders permitting the seizure of relevant evidence, 74  and orders securing the attendance of
witnesses. 75  This range of powers, whether exercised directly by the arbitral tribunal itself or indirectly by application to the
courts, provides the support from national legal systems that international arbitration requires to achieve its purpose. 76
Footnotes
7
As far as the tribunal’s powers are concerned, the applicable law is usually the proper law of the arbitration agreement
and the law of the place of arbitration. For discussion of applicable law generally, see Chapter 3.
8
See Chapter 2, paragraphs 05–2.07.
9
ICC Rules, Art. 18.1. See also UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 18.1; LCIA Rules, Art. 16.2.
10
Some Latin American states, such as Colombia and Ecuador, do not follow this rule in domestic arbitrations and grant
to arbitrators a degree of imperium, such that they can call upon public officers to enforce their orders directly as if they
were a court of law. See, e.g., Ecuador’s 2006 Arbitration and Mediation Law, s. 9: ‘[Arbitrators] shall request the aid of
public, judicial, police and administrative officers as shall be necessary without having to resort to any ordinary judge
at the place where [ … ] it is necessary to adopt those provisional measures.’ See, for a fuller description, Marchan,
‘Ecuador’, in Newman and Ong (eds) Interim Measures in International Arbitration (Juris, 2014), pp. 217ff.
11
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 38(3). The arbitral tribunal can enforce this order by dismissing the claim if it is not
complied with: s. 41(6).
12
Ibid, s. 38(5).
13
Ibid, s. 34. This power is also granted by Model Law, Art. 19(1).
14
See, e.g., New Zealand Arbitration Act 1996, s. 12; Swiss PIL, s. 183; Brazilian Arbitration Act 1996, art. 22.
15
French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1467: ‘Le tribunal arbitral peut entendre toute personne. Cette audition a lieu sans
prestation de serment [The arbitral tribunal may hear any person. This hearing takes place without taking an oath].’ By
contrast, some jurisdictions require oaths to be taken in a prescribed manner while others adopt a middle ground and
grant to the tribunal the power to administer an oath. In the US case In re Arbitration between International Bechtel
Co. Ltd v Department of Civil Aviation of the Government of Dubai 300 F.Supp.2d 112 (DDC 2005), the US District
Court for the District of Columbia refused to enforce an award set aside in Dubai on the basis of the failure properly to
administer the oath in accordance with the then current version of the UAE Civil Code.
16
Similar rules apply under institutional rules: see the CIETAC Rules, Art. 35.1.
17
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 18.1 (‘If the parties have not previously agreed on the place of arbitration, the place of arbitration
shall be determined by the arbitral tribunal having regard to the circumstances of the case.’) LCIA Rules, Art. 16.2
(London, England as the default seat unless the tribunal concludes another seat is more appropriate after hearing the
parties).
18
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 35.1.
19
The determination of the applicable law is addressed in detail in Chapter 3.
20
UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 19.1.
21
See Chapter 2, paragraphs 2.94–2.95.
22
The question of the production of documentary evidence is discussed in detail in Chapter 6, paragraphs 6.90ff.
23
French Code of Civil Procedure, art. 1467: ‘Si une partie détient un élément de preuve, le tribunal arbitral peut lui
enjoindre de le produire selon les modalités qu’il détermine et au besoin à peine d’astreinte. [If a party is in possession
of evidence, the arbitral tribunal may order it to be produced in a manner that the tribunal decides and if necessary,
under penalty for failure to do so.]’
24
For more detail, see Chapter 6, paragraphs 6.114–6.115.
25
FAA, § 7, which states that arbitrators ‘may summon in writing any person to attend before them [ … ] as a witness
and in a proper case to bring with him or them any book, record, document, or paper which may be deemed material
as evidence in the case’. For an example of the use of the power and confirmation of its application to non-parties see
Stolt-Nielson SA v Celanese AG, 430 F.3d 567 (2d Cir. 2005).

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
26
See paragraph 5.49.
27
Swiss PIL, s. 184(2).
28
For example, LCIA Rules, Art. 22.1.iv; PCA Rules, Art. 27.3.
29
See IBA Rules, Art. 7 (‘Inspection’).
30
For example, UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 29.1; CIETAC Rules, Art. 44.1.
31
See IBA Rules, Art. 6 (‘Tribunal-Appointed Experts’).
32
See Chapter 6, paragraphs 6.138ff.
33
This was the case of the independent expert appointed in Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona SA and Vivendi
Universal SA v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19. See Award (9 April 2015), at [7]–[18].
34
One comprehensive procedure, which may be incorporated or used as a checklist, is established at IBA Rules, Art. 6.
For examples of the use of independent experts in investment arbitration, see Perenco Ecuador Limited v Republic of
Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Interim Decision on the Environmental Counterclaim, 11 August 2015, at [585]ff;
Abaclat and Others v Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Procedural Order No. 15, 20 November 2012,
at [11]ff.
35
The details of this proposal are set out in Sachs, ‘Protocol on expert teaming: A new approach to expert evidence’, in
ICCA (ed.) Arbitration Advocacy in Changing Times (Kluwer, 2011), pp. 135ff.
36
Similar ‘ground rules’ are established in IBA Rules, Art. 6.
37
As the tribunal noted in Burlington Resources v Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Procedural Order
No. 1, 29 June 2009, at [60]: ‘In the Tribunal’s view, the rights to be preserved by provisional measures are not limited
to those which form the subject-matter of the dispute or substantive rights as referred to by the Respondents, but may
extend to procedural rights, including the general right to the status quo and to the non-aggravation of the dispute.’
38
Model Law, Chapter IV.A; UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 26.
39
ICC Rules, Art. 28.
40
LCIA Rules, Art. 9B; SCC Rules, Art. 37.4 and Appendix II; ICC Rules, Art. 29.1 and Appendix V; ICDR Rules, Art.
7; SIAC Rules, r. 30.2, with proceedings governed by Sch. 1.
41
See Chapter 4, paragraphs 4.11ff for a review of the role of Emergency Arbitrators.
42
For example, UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 26; LCIA Rules, Art. 25; ICDR Rules, Art. 27.
43
ICSID Rules, r. 47(1); see also ICSID Convention, Art. 47.
44
In this regard, in Emilio Agustín Maffezini v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural Order No. 2,
28 October 1999, at [9] , the ICSID tribunal came to the following conclusion: ‘The Tribunal’s authority to rule on
provisional measures is no less binding than that of a final award. Accordingly, for the purposes of this order, the tribunal
deems the word ‘recommend’ to be of equivalent value as the word “order”.’ See also Quiborax SA v Plurinational
State of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Award, 16 September 2015, at [578]–[582]. The case law is addressed in
Kaufmann-Kohler, Antonietti, and Potestà, ‘Interim relief in investment arbitration’, in Yannaka-Small (ed.) Arbitration
under International Investment Agreements (Oxford University Press, 2018), pp. 633–678, at [24.149]. See also Sinclair
and Repousis, ‘An overview of provisional measures in ICSID proceedings’ (2017) 32 ICSID Rev—Foreign Investment
LJ 431.
45
Valle Verde v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/18, Decision on Provisional Measures, 25
January 2016, at [75].
46
Rizzani de Eccher S.p.A. v State of Kuwait, ICSID Case No. ARB/17/8, Decision on Provisional Measures, 23
November 2017, at [99], [101] (citing Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production
Co. v Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007, at [59]).
47
See, e.g., Swiss Rules, Art. 29.3 (emphasis added): In exceptional circumstances, the arbitral tribunal may rule on a
request for interim measures by way of a preliminary order before the request has been communicated to any other party,
provided that such communication is made at the latest together with the preliminary order and that the other parties
are immediately granted an opportunity to be heard.
48
See van Houtte, ‘Ten reasons against a proposal for ex parte interim measures of protection in arbitration’ (2004) 20
Arb Intl 85, at 89.
49
Indeed, it is questionable whether any provisional or interim relief ordered by an arbitral tribunal is enforceable by state
courts under the New York Convention absent specific authority, since, by definition, such decisions will not be final:
see Chapter 7, paragraph 7.26ff.
50
See Chapter 1, paragraphs 1.144–1.146.
51
Recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards is discussed in Chapter 11.

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
52
The LCIA Rules, e.g., provide in Art. 25.2 that if the claimant is unable to provide security as ordered, the tribunal may
‘stay that party’s claims, counterclaims or cross-claims or dismiss them by an award’.
53
See the discussion in Redfern and O’Leary, ‘Why it is time for international arbitration to embrace security for
costs’ (2016) 32 Arb Intl 397, at 399.
54
Craig, Park, and Paulson, International Chamber of Commerce Arbitration (ICC Publishing, 2000), pp. 467–468.
55
See Redfern and O’Leary, fn. 53, pp. 401–403.
56
For ICSID, see Libananco Holdings v Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB 06/8, Decision on Preliminary Issues,
23 June 2008, at [31], [56]–[60]. For UNCITRAL, see Guaracachi America, Inc. and Rurelec plc v Plurinational State
of Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2011-17, Procedural Order No. 14, 11 March 2013, at [5]–[6] and Manuel Garcia Armas et
al. v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, PCA Case No. 2016-08, Procedural Order No. 9, 20 June 2018.
57
Notably, the current ICC Rules require the disclosure of third-party funding. ICC Rules, Art. 11.7. Rule 14(1) of the
ICSID Rules also requires such disclosure (‘A party shall file a written notice disclosing the name and address of any
non-party from which the party, directly or indirectly, has received funds for the pursuit or defense of the proceeding
through a donation or grant, or in return for remuneration dependent on the outcome of the proceeding’).
58
See Guaracachi, fn. 56, at [7].
59
Previti, ‘Recently published decision confirms exceptional nature of security for costs’ Burford Blog, 7 December 2020.
See also Goldberg, Kryvoi, and Philippov, ‘Empirical study: Provisional measures in investorstate arbitration’ (2019)
BIICL/White & Case 14.
60
Commerce Group Corp. and San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. v Republic of El Salvador, ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17,
Decision on El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs (Annulment Proceeding), 20 September 2012, at [45].
61
See RSM Production, Inc. v Saint Lucia, ICSID Case No. ARB 12/10, Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security
for Costs, 13 August 2014.
62
See Manuel Garcia Armas and ors v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, PCA Case No. 2016-08, Procedural Order No.
9, 20 June 2018. Other successful applications for security for costs were made in Eugene Kazmin v Republic of Latvia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/17/5, Procedural Order No. 6, 13 April 2020; Adamakopoulos and ors v Cyprus, ICSID Case No.
ARB/15/49, Procedural Order No. 8, 8 June 2020 (decision not publicly available).
63
See LCIA Rules, Art. 18.5 and 18.6, and Annex.
64
For instance, from mid-March until mid-December 2020, ICSID administered nearly 150 remote hearings or sessions,
up from ninety-five remote hearings or sessions during the same period in 2019. See ‘Hearings and Sessions held in
ICSID Cases from March to December (2019 vs. 2020)’, ICSID, 20 December 2020.
65
See ‘Right to a Physical Hearing Project: The Release of 20 New Reports Reinforces Core Trends and Important
Divergences’, ICCA, 18 March 2021.
66
van Zelst, ‘The Netherlands’, ICCA Projects: Does a Right to a Physical Hearing Exist in International Arbitration?,
2021, at 2–3.
67
Scherer et al., ‘In a “First” Worldwide, Austrian Supreme Court Confirms Arbitral Tribunal’s Power to Hold Remote
Hearings Over One Party’s Objection and Rejects Due Process Concerns’, Kluwer Arbitration Blog, 24 October 2020.
The Court noted that in situations in which insistence on an in-person hearing could lead to a procedural standstill,
videoconferencing can be compatible with a party’s right to get effective access to justice and to be heard, which is
enshrined in Art. 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).
68
LCIA Rules, Art. 19.2 (‘The Arbitral Tribunal shall have the fullest authority under the Arbitration Agreement to
establish the conduct of a hearing, including its date, duration, form, content, procedure, time-limits and geographical
place (if applicable). As to form, a hearing may take place in person, or virtually by conference call, videoconference
or using other communications technology with participants in one or more geographical places (or in a combined
form)’); ICC Rules, Art. 26.1 (‘The arbitral tribunal may decide, after consulting the parties, and on the basis of the
relevant facts and circumstances of the case, that any hearing will be conducted by physical attendance or remotely by
videoconference, telephone or other appropriate means of communication.’)
69
‘A significant impact’, Campaign for Greener Arbitrations (2021), available at https://www.greenerarbitrations.com/
impact.
70
See Chapter 7 for more details on these powers.
71
English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 42. A court can make such orders only if it is satisfied that the person to whom the
tribunal’s order was directed has had sufficient time to comply.
72
Ibid., ss. 43 and 44.
73
Ibid., s. 44(3).
74
Ibid., s. 44(2)(c).
75
Ibid., s. 43(1).

Section B. - Powers of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638633 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
76
This will be examined in more detail in Chapter 7.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
