Choice of law and the law of the place of arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407021 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Choice of law and the law of the place of arbitration
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Choice of law and the law of the place of arbitration
21-13
Article 21(1) is subject to the mandatory law of the place of arbitration. However, as a general rule, the law applicable in major
centres of arbitration adopts a liberal approach with respect to the right of the parties to choose the applicable law and the method
by which the Tribunal determines the applicable law. Nevertheless, in exercising its discretion to determine the applicable law,
a Tribunal may well wish to refer to the principles regarding determination of applicable law at the place of arbitration.
21-14
In France, art.1511 of the French CPC provides that:
“The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the rules of law chosen by the parties or, where
no such choice has been made, in accordance with the rules of law it considers appropriate. In either case, the
arbitral tribunal shall take trade usages into account.” 119
21-15
The French courts have confirmed that “[t]o determine the law applicable to the merits, the arbitrator is not required to apply
a conflicts rule of a specific national legislation”. 120  Therefore French arbitration law grants wide discretionary powers to
arbitrators as to the methods for determining the appropriate rule(s) of law. Arbitrators are permitted to refer to conflict of law
principles, use the voie directe or even apply lex mercatoria if they think that it is the appropriate rule of law. The Tribunal
must, however, give reasons for its decision and respect the mandatory rules that are applicable, failing which the award may
be subject to a challenge. 121
21-16
In Switzerland, art.187(1) of the Swiss PILA provides that “[t]he Tribunal shall decide the case according to the rules of law
chosen by the parties or, in the absence thereof, according to the rules of law with which the dispute has the closest connection”.
21-17
Unlike French law, Swiss law refers to the use of the principle of the closest connection to determine the law applicable to
the merits. Arguably, the second sentence of art.21(1) permits a Tribunal to use the voie directe in Switzerland. Article 187(1)
of the Swiss PILA refers to the “rules of law chosen by the parties” and not to the method of choosing the applicable law.
However, this distinction may be artificial as the Rules are intended to permit the voie directe and the parties have accepted
this principle in accepting the Rules.
21-18
Many Tribunals will, in any event, apply the principle of the law with the closest connection to determine the applicable rules
of law. In Switzerland, an arbitral award should explain the basis on which the Tribunal found that the law was most closely
connected with the dispute. 122
21-19
In the US, the Federal Arbitration Act contains no express provision regarding the choice of applicable law. Therefore, in most
cases, one would expect that Tribunals would apply standard conflict of law principles to determine the applicable law. However,
although not binding, art.187(2) of the Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws provides in pertinent part that:

Choice of law and the law of the place of arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407021 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
“[t]he law of the state chosen by the parties to govern their contractual rights and duties will be applied, even if the
particular issue is one which the parties could not have resolved by an explicit provision in their agreement directed
to that issue, unless either (a) the chosen state has no substantial relationship to the parties or the transaction and
there is no other reasonable basis for the parties’ choice, or (b) application of the law of the chosen state would
be contrary to a fundamental policy of a state which has a materially greater interest than the chosen state in the
determination of the particular issue …”
21-20
A detailed discussion of what constitutes a substantial relationship with the parties or the transaction within the meaning of the
Restatement goes beyond the scope of this book. However, arguably the fact that an arbitration is being conducted in a specific
country provides a substantial relationship. In addition, the issue with respect to US law is which state law is applicable and
various states have enacted provisions expressly permitting parties to choose the applicable law in commercial transactions. 123
21-21
In England, s.46(1)(a) of the English Arbitration Act 1996 provides that the Tribunal shall decide the dispute “in accordance
with the law chosen by the parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute”. In the absence of such a choice of law by the
parties s.46(1)(b) of the act provides that the Tribunal shall decide the dispute “(b) if the parties so agree, in accordance with
such other considerations as are agreed by them or determined by the Tribunal”. Section 46(2) goes on that for this purpose the
choice of the laws of a country shall be understood to refer to the substantive laws of that country and not its conflict of laws
rules. Section 46(3) gives the Tribunal the power to “apply the law determined by the conflict of laws rules which it considers
applicable” to the extent there is no choice or agreement of the parties.
21-22
Section 46 is not one of the mandatory provisions of the English Arbitration Act of 1996. 124  Therefore, parties can contract
out of it, in particular, by accepting arbitration rules such as the ICC Rules. Under English law, the Tribunal is free to determine
the conflict of laws rules applicable, but is expected to apply conflict of law principles in determining the law applicable to the
dispute. However, the acceptance of the Rules should be viewed as a contrary agreement. If English conflicts rules are applied,
one would generally expect the law to be applied to be that with which the contract is most closely connected.
21-23
The English High Court considered s.46 in the Peterson Farms case. In that case, the arbitrators relied in part of their award on
the “common intent of the parties” to apply the “group of companies doctrine” with respect to the parties to the arbitration. 125
The court categorically rejected the approach holding that a state law had to be applicable.
21-24
In the countries which have followed the UNCITRAL Model Law, art.28 of the UNCITRAL Model Law will be the relevant
provision when it comes to the applicable law:
 
“(1)The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with such rules of law as are chosen by the
parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute. Any designation of the law or legal system of a given
State shall be construed, unless otherwise expressed, as directly referring to the substantive law of that State
and not to its conflict of laws rules.
 
(2)Failing any designation by the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall apply the law determined by the conflict
of laws rules which it considers applicable …”
21-25
The UNCITRAL Working Group Notes 126  make several basic points about art.28 of the UNCITRAL Model Law, which are of
general interest for arbitration practitioners and therefore repeated here: first, “Article 28 deals with the question which law or
rules the arbitral tribunal shall apply to the substance of the dispute”. It does not deal with the arbitral procedure. Secondly, art.28

Choice of law and the law of the place of arbitration, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407021 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
grants “the parties full autonomy to determine the issue (including the option of amiable composition) and, failing agreement,
by entrusting the arbitral tribunal with that determination”. Thirdly, art.28 refers to:
“the freedom to choose ‘rules of law’ and not merely a ‘law’, which could be understood as referring to the legal
system of one particular State only. This provides the parties with a wider range of options and allows them, for
example, to designate as applicable to their case rules of more than one legal system, including rules of law which
have been elaborated on the international level.”
Footnotes
119
Translation by Paris, The Home of International Arbitration, The 13 January 2011 Decree. The New French Arbitration
Law, p.33. More generally, see Clay, op. cit., pp.269–271.
120
Paris, 13 July 1989, Compania Valenciana de Cementos Portland SA v Primary Coal Inc (1990) Rev. Arb. No.3 p.663,
note Lagarde; (1990) JDI p.430, note Goldman; (1991) YBCA Vol.XVI p.142.
121
Delvolvé, Rouche & Pointon, op. cit., pp.144ff.
122
It is possible under Swiss law to choose as an applicable law a non-national law, see Girsberger & Voser, International
Arbitration: Comparative and Swiss Perspectives, 3rd edn (2016), p.358 and following.
123
See for example para.5–1401 of the New York General Obligations Law provides in relevant part that: “Choice of law.
1. The parties to any contract, agreement or undertaking, contingent or otherwise, in consideration of, or relating to
any obligation arising out of a transaction covering in the aggregate not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars,
including a transaction otherwise covered by subsection one of section 1–105 of the uniform commercial code, may
agree that the law of this state shall govern their rights and duties in whole or in part, whether or not such contract,
agreement or undertaking bears a reasonable relation to this state.” There are exceptions for various specific types of
contracts. However, this provision was aimed at permitting broad use of New York law in commercial transactions,
although it would presumably be subject to any constitutional limitations.
124
Sutton, Gill & Gearing, op. cit., para.2–09, pp.79–80.
125
See Peterson Farms Inc v C&M Farming Ltd [2004] EWHC 121 (Comm); also see the discussion at para.6-80 in relation
to the group of companies doctrine.
126
A/CN.9/264 English, p.61.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
