Article 26(3): Tribunal in charge of hearings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407047 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 26(3): Tribunal in charge of hearings
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 26(3): Tribunal in charge of hearings
“The arbitral tribunal shall be in full charge of the hearings, at which all the parties shall be entitled to be present. Save
with the approval of the arbitral tribunal and the parties, persons not involved in the proceedings shall not be admitted.”
26-24
The basic principle is that the Tribunal is responsible for the conduct of proceedings. Usually, after consulting the parties, the
Tribunal will set out in advance the way in which it intends to conduct the hearings, either in writing or through a telephone or
video conference with the parties, followed by a procedural order. 417  The hearings usually have two main objectives, to hear
the arguments of the parties and the evidence of the witnesses.
26-25
If there is to be only one set of hearings, the parties may each present a brief introduction on the first day and closing statements
on the last day of the hearings, but neither are required in an ICC arbitration. If separate hearings or post-hearing briefs are
scheduled for legal argument, there is generally no oral argument at the end of the evidentiary hearings. Arbitral hearings are less
formal than court hearings. In small and medium-sized arbitrations, physical hearings may be held in a conference room with
the parties and the counsel seated at a conference table. Where more persons are present, there is usually a separate conference
table for the Tribunal and for the parties. 418  In either case, there is direct personal interaction between the Tribunal, the parties
and witnesses, which personalises the impact of allegations in witness statements, for example.
26-26
With regard to time allocation, frequently one member or the secretary (if any) of the Tribunal (as well as the lawyers for the
parties) keeps a record of the time used by each party and provides that summary to the parties on a daily basis. This enables
the Tribunal to pay overall attention to equitable use of time although it should be made clear in the procedural order that there
is no commitment to more than rough equality as to the allocation of time. In this respect, one issue that sometimes arises is
unequal numbers of witnesses on each side. If the claimant calls one witness for example and the respondent calls eight, then
the claimant will usually argue that it needs more time for cross examination. Usually, the issue is resolved with a compromise
solution that reflects the number of witnesses to be cross examined on each side but also the scope of the cross examination for
each witness (which will naturally be broader for the claimant’s sole witness in this example).
26-27
During the hearings, procedural issues may arise that the Tribunal will have to decide rapidly, and often on the spot. Therefore,
it is not infrequent for the Tribunal to issue procedural orders during the hearings, first orally, and sometimes subsequently in
written form. No formal requirement exists under the Rules, and the best way to proceed will be left to the Tribunal. It would
normally be sufficient if the minutes of the hearing, or a verbatim hearing transcript records the Tribunal’s order.
26-28
If factual witnesses and experts testify, then there is an initial issue as to how such questioning will be carried out and by whom.
The civil law approach in national court proceedings is to have questioning mainly by the judge. The common law approach
is generally to have questioning mainly by the lawyers.

Article 26(3): Tribunal in charge of hearings, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407047 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
26-29
These differences in approach have been very much attenuated in international arbitration. 419  However, they are subject to
certain recent developments, such as “witness conferencing”, that are briefly discussed below. But either way, as stated by
art.5.9 of the Prague Rules, it is generally admitted in international arbitrations that “the examination of any fact witness shall
be conducted under the direction and control of the arbitral tribunal”. In practice, this happens to various degrees, depending
very much on the personal style of a sole or presiding arbitrator, but also the level of preparation of the Tribunal. Interestingly,
when comparing the IBA Rules on Evidence and the Prague Rules in relation to the Tribunal’s conduct at the hearing, there
exist no material differences. 420
26-30
The evidence submitted to a Tribunal is generally not subject to any specific rules of evidence. As noted for example in the IBA
Rules on Evidence, it is up to the Tribunal to decide the weight to be given to particular items of evidence.
Footnotes
417
On the power of the Tribunal to organise the proceedings and the binding nature of its procedural orders, see for example
Karrer, “Freedom of an arbitral tribunal to conduct proceedings” [1999] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.10 No.1, p.14; Orrego
Vicuna, “The binding nature of procedural orders in international arbitration” [1999] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.10 No.1,
p.38; Donovan, “Powers of the arbitrators to issue procedural orders, including interim measures of protection, and the
obligations of parties to abide by such orders” [1999] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.10 No.1, p.57; Böckstiegel, “Major Criteria
for International Arbitrators in Shaping an Efficient Procedure” [1999] ICC ICArb. Bull., Special Supplement, p.49.
Born, International Commercial Arbitration, op.cit., pp.2120 and following.
418
Where there is a court reporter, he or she may sit next to the Tribunal or between the Tribunal and the witnesses.
419
See, for example, Elsing & Townsend, “Bridging the Common-Law Civil Divide in Arbitration” (2002) Arbitration Int.
Vol.1 No.1, p.59.
420
Compare in particular art.8.2 of the IBA Rules on Evidence with art.5.9 of the Prague Rules (as to the latter see
para.25-42).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
