“unless the parties have otherwise agreed”, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407012 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
“unless the parties have otherwise agreed”
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
“unless the parties have otherwise agreed”
28-14
The Tribunal has the power to order interim or conservatory measures unless the parties have otherwise agreed. 468  The parties
may otherwise agree in the arbitration agreement itself, in an agreement immediately prior to the arbitration or by their choice
of procedural law, if any. In arbitration agreements, it seems very rare to see language excluding the Tribunal’s power to grant
interim relief; one tends, however, to see language to broaden rather than limit the right to issue interim or conservatory measures.
In some instances, there is express reference to the right of a party to seek interim relief from a national court and/or from the
Tribunal. Immediately prior to the arbitration, the parties frequently have difficulty on agreeing on any aspects of the procedure.
However, it may be in their interest to avoid disruption through an interim agreement as to how to conduct their relationship
pending resolution of their dispute. It is less frequent that the parties agree on a specific system of law that would govern the
granting of conservatory relief, although there are important differences between national legal systems with respect to certain
forms of relief. Therefore, in most instances, the Tribunal will have to determine whether, under the rules and the law that would
be applicable with respect to the conservatory or interim measure, it is permitted to grant the relief. 469
Footnotes
468
On the possibility for the parties to restrict or exclude on a contractual basis the recourse to courts to seek interim
measures, see Fouchard, Gaillard & Goldman, op. cit., para.1319, p.718.
469
See for example art.183 of the Swiss PILA, art.1468 of the French CPC and more generally, see Clay, op. cit., pp.150–
152, s.44 of the English Arbitration Act 1996; s.7502(c) of the US Civil Practice Laws and Rules authorising New
York courts to grant provisional measures in international arbitration, New York Law Journal, 12 October 2005, by
Caher. More generally, see Rau, “Provisional Relief in Arbitration: How Things Stand in the United States” (2005)
J. Int. Arb. Vol.22 No.1, p.1. See also Pietrois-Chabassier “La nécessaire collaboration des juges et arbitres pour
assurer l’efficacité de l’arbitrage international: les mesures conservatoires et provisoires et la question des tiers en
France et aux Etats-Unis”; http://blogs.u-paris10.fr/content/la-n%C3%A9cessaire-collaboration-des-juges-et-arbitres-
pour-assurer-lefficacit%C3%A9-de-larbitrage-int [accessed 29 October 2021].
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
