Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638630...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 4 - Establishment and Organisation of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators
(a) Introduction
4. 69
It is a fundamental principle of international arbitration that every arbitrator, whether acting as a member of an arbitral tribunal
or as a sole arbitrator, must be impartial and independent of the parties not only at the time of accepting the appointment but
throughout the entire course of the arbitral proceedings. 94  This raises the question of what is meant by independence and
impartiality. ‘Independence’ is generally considered to be concerned with the relationship or links between an arbitrator and
one of the parties, whether financial or otherwise. This is thought to be susceptible to an objective test, as it has nothing to do
with an arbitrator’s state of mind. By contrast, the concept of ‘impartiality’ is considered to be connected with actual or apparent
bias of an arbitrator—either in favour of one of the parties, or in relation to the issues in dispute. Impartiality is thus a subjective
and a more abstract concept than independence, in that it involves primarily a state of mind. 95  In many jurisdictions there is a
legal obligation to act with independence and impartiality, 96  and to declare any facts or circumstances likely to cast doubts on
their impartiality or independence, so that others may judge whether or not they are truly independent and impartial. 97
4. 70
This duty of disclosure is not a mere formality. An arbitrator may be challenged for lack of independence or impartiality for
failure to disclose and if the challenge is upheld, be required to resign. If this happens during the arbitral proceedings, it will
cause delay and additional expense as a replacement arbitrator has to be found, nominated, and appointed. If it happens after the
tribunal’s award has been issued, it may lead to recognition and enforcement of that award being denied. 98  In a situation where
the arbitrator knowingly failed to disclose a conflict of interest (and perhaps in a situation where the arbitrator was reckless in
failing to do so), that arbitrator might well be held personally liable for the loss and damage caused. 99
4. 71
The standard to be met in deciding what needs to be disclosed varies. Under the provisions of the Model Law, and of the many
states that have adopted that law, the position is as follows: 100
When a person is approached in connection with his possible appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose
any circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his impartiality or independence. An arbitrator
from the time of his appointment and throughout the arbitral proceedings, shall without delay disclose any such
circumstances to the parties unless they have already been informed of them by him.
4. 72
Under what might for convenience be called ‘the Model Law test’, it is generally accepted that the standard for disclosure is not
what the arbitrator or potential arbitrator considers should be disclosed, but more importantly what a reasonable third person
having knowledge of the relevant facts and circumstances would expect to see disclosed. 101  An obvious example would be a
substantial financial interest of the prospective arbitrator in the appointing party. Recent trends suggest that arbitrators should
be subject to a higher scrutiny and err in favour of disclosure if they have any doubt as to whether a disclosure should be
made. 102  For instance, in 2018, the Paris Court of Appeal annulled an award because the sole arbitrator had failed to disclose
a previous appointment by one of the parties, even though in the previous arbitration no award was rendered as the parties had
settled the dispute. 103  In 2020, the Court of Appeals of the State of São Paulo annulled an ICC award on the grounds that the

Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638630...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
chair of the tribunal had failed to disclose in a timely manner his appointment by one of the parties to serve as an arbitrator
in a non-related case. 104
4. 73
Under the influential ‘Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration’ issued by the IBA and under the rules of
many leading arbitral institutions, the test is a subjective one. The question to be considered by the potential arbitrator is: ‘are the
facts and circumstances disclosed likely to give rise in the eyes of the parties to doubts as to my impartiality or independence’. 105
The difference between this subjective approach, and an objective approach, is important. Suppose, for example, that the tax
partner in the prospective arbitrator’s law firm has recently acted for the respondent to the arbitration in a case that has no
relationship to the arbitration. This may seem to be of no significance to a third-party observer looking at the issue objectively;
but from the viewpoint of the claimant, it is likely to be seen as something that at the very least should be explored, if only to
test the present (and any possible future) relationship between the respondent and the prospective arbitrator’s law firm.
4. 74
When first adopting the subjective standard for disclosure in its ‘Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International Arbitration’
in 2004 (which we shall refer to as the ‘IBA Guidelines’), the IBA Working Group observed: 106
A purely objective test for disclosure exists in the majority of the jurisdictions analysed and in the UNCITRAL
Model Law. Nevertheless, the Working Group recognises that the parties have an interest in being fully informed
about any circumstances that may be relevant in their view. Because of the strongly held views of many arbitration
institutions (as reflected in their rules and as stated to the Working Group) that the disclosure test should reflect
the perspectives of the parties, the Working Group in principle accepted, after much debate, a subjective approach
for disclosure. The Working Group has adapted the language of Article 7 (2) of the ICC Rules for this standard.
4. 75
Article 7.2 has become Article 11.2 in the 2021 ICC Rules, but the principle has not changed. Article 11.2 makes it clear that
the test is both subjective and objective and reads as follows (emphasis added):
Before appointment or confirmation, a prospective arbitrator shall sign a statement of acceptance, availability,
impartiality and independence. The prospective arbitrator shall disclose in writing to the Secretariat any facts
or circumstances which might be of such a nature as to call into question the arbitrator’s independence in the
eyes of the parties, as well as any circumstances that could give rise to reasonable doubts as to the arbitrator’s
impartiality. The Secretariat shall provide such information to the parties in writing and fix a time limit for any
comments from them.
Article 11.3 of the ICC Rules makes it clear that this obligation of disclosure is a continuing obligation throughout the arbitral
proceedings.
4. 76
By adopting the practice of the leading arbitral institutions on this issue, rather than simply following the less stringent ‘Model
Law test’, the IBA Working Group showed a commendable understanding of the parties’ approach to the issue of bias, including
unconscious bias, on the part of the arbitrators who are to stand in judgment on their dispute. For parties who have chosen to
submit their dispute to arbitration rather than to the courts, it is ‘their’ arbitration and ‘their’ tribunal. When it comes to the
appointment of an arbitrator, what matters is how that arbitrator’s possible conflict of interest looks to them, and not how it
might look to a disinterested third party.
4. 77
The disclosure by an arbitrator or prospective arbitrator of a possible conflict of interest does not necessarily mean that there
actually is a conflict. On the contrary, arbitrators who disclose possible conflicts of interest plainly consider themselves to
be impartial and independent, despite the facts and circumstances disclosed. If this were not the case, they should not have
been prepared to accept the appointment. By making disclosure of what the parties might perceive to be possible conflicts of
interest, arbitrators give those parties the opportunity: (i) to decide whether they agree with the arbitrators’ assessment; (ii) to

Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638630...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
ask for further, more specific, and detailed information if they think it appropriate to do so; or (iii) to challenge the proposed
appointment, if they consider it appropriate to do so.
(b) Disclosure
4. 78
In the original 2004 IBA Guidelines, it was recognised that when it came to the disclosure of possible conflicts of interest that
might throw doubt on the independence or impartiality of a potential arbitrator, ‘parties, arbitrators, institutions and courts face
complex decisions about what to disclose and what standards to apply’. It was also noted that there was a tension between the
parties’ right to know of situations that might ‘reasonably call into question an arbitrator’s impartiality or independence’ and
their right ‘to select arbitrators of their choosing’. This concern was repeated in the latest revised and updated version of the
Guidelines, issued in 2014. 107
4. 79
These Guidelines, which apply to both international commercial arbitrations and to investment arbitrations, 108  start by
enunciating the general principle that international arbitrators are required to be both impartial and independent; and they
explain that if arbitrators have doubts as to whether or not they fulfil this requirement, they should simply refuse appointment
or, if already appointed, refuse to continue to act. 109  The Guidelines also explain, and this is important, that the test for
disqualification of an arbitrator is an objective test as to whether there are justifiable doubts as to that arbitrator’s independence
or impartiality. This is described as the ‘reasonable third person test’. Would a reasonable third person, having knowledge of
the relevant facts and circumstances, reach the conclusion that the arbitrator was likely to be influenced by factors other than
the merits of the case?
4. 80
It is easy to state the test, but not so easy to apply it. The Guidelines note, for example, the problems that may arise when a
partner in a law firm is being considered for appointment as an arbitrator by a client of that firm. The Guidelines state that a
partner must in principle be considered to bear the identity of his or her law firm, but that the activities of that law firm should
not automatically create a conflict of interest. The suggestion is that the nature, timing, and scope of the work done by the law
firm, and ‘the relationship’ of the partner to that law firm, may be such that there is in fact no conflict (a clue as to what exactly
is meant by this is to be found later in the Guidelines, where there is a reference to a law firm rendering services to one of the
parties ‘without creating a significant commercial relationship for that law firm and without the involvement of the partner’). 110
4. 81
The Guidelines go on to describe the ‘traffic lights system’, devised to help users determine, at least preliminarily, whether a
particular situation should be disclosed. There is first a ‘Red List’, which is divided into (i) relationships that are not waivable
and (ii) relationships that may be waived if all the parties to the arbitration agree. The Non-Waivable Red List includes, for
instance, cases in which the arbitrator has a significant financial or personal relationship with one of the parties. The basic
principle is that no-one should be ‘a judge in their own cause’. The Waivable Red List covers situations that are described
as being ‘serious but not as severe’ as those on the non-waivable Red List. 111  The examples given include the case where a
close family member of the arbitrator ‘has a significant financial interest in the outcome of the dispute’. 112  Such a situation
is considered to be waivable, but only if the parties are made aware of the situation and expressly state that they are willing
nonetheless to have such a person as arbitrator.
4. 82
Next is the Orange List, which is likely to be the most controversial. On the public highways, it is generally accepted (except
by cyclists and van drivers) that an orange traffic light means stop—or at least, proceed with caution. In the Guidelines, the
Orange List is described as ‘a non-exhaustive list of specific situations that, depending on the facts of a given case, may in
the eyes of the parties give rise to doubts as to the arbitrator’s impartiality or independence’. 113  These are situations that the
arbitrator or prospective arbitrator has a duty to disclose, so that the parties have an opportunity to object or to ask for further
information, if they wish to do so.

Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638630...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
4. 83
Many of these duties to disclose are subject to a ‘three-year limit’. For example, at paragraph 3.1.4 of the Guidelines, it is said
that if an arbitrator’s law firm has acted for one of the parties ‘within the past three years’ in an unrelated matter and without
the involvement of the arbitrator, this must be declared. Taken literally, this suggests that after three years, nothing needs to be
declared—even if three years and one month ago the arbitrator was a lead adviser to one of the parties. Again, at paragraph
3.3.3, it is said that an arbitrator must disclose the fact that he or she was ‘within the past three years, a partner of, or otherwise
affiliated with [ … ] any of the counsel in the arbitration’. Again, this suggests that after three years, there is no conflict of
interest. Such a clear cut-off date appears to be somewhat arbitrary; and, when making disclosures, a prospective arbitrator
should recall that what is relevant is the parties’ perception of independence and impartiality and that the Guidelines are simply
guidelines and not rules of law.
4. 84
Finally, comes the ‘Green List’. This is intended to cover cases where there is no real or apparent conflict of interest from an
objective point of view. There is no duty to disclose such situations. This is because, as the Guidelines state, ‘there should be a
limit to disclosure, based on reasonableness’. 114  Examples include cases where the arbitrator holds an insignificant number of
shares in one of the parties or teaches in the same faculty as counsel to one of the parties. 115
4. 85
The Guidelines do not purport to address every possible conflict of interest that might arise in practice. Indeed, they cannot be
expected to do so. But the Guidelines do make it clear that the independence and impartiality of international arbitrators is a
matter of crucial importance. It is not something that is to be taken lightly or for granted. Prospective arbitrators who consult
the Guidelines will be made aware of the need to consider carefully whether there are any possible conflicts of interest that
should be declared, so that the parties may see for themselves whether to challenge their appointment. If in doubt about whether
a particular situation is caught, an arbitrator should err on the side of caution and disclose it.
4. 86
The Guidelines are particularly valuable in helping to ensure that arbitrators and prospective arbitrators think carefully about
relationships or situations which might seem perfectly acceptable to them, but which might nevertheless raise reasonable doubts
in the minds of one or other of the parties. 116
4. 87
In general, the leading arbitral institutions take account of the Guidelines, whilst remaining free to make up their own minds
when it comes to deciding particular challenges. This is understandable, since the approach taken by the Guidelines may be less
rigorous than that adopted by some arbitral institutions. The Guidelines, which were drawn up by an international association
of lawyers, offer a more favourable treatment to lawyers and to law firms than the arbitral institutions are likely to do. The ICC,
for example, will not appoint as arbitrator a lawyer who is in the same law firm as counsel, even if the prospective arbitrator is
in Hong Kong and the counsel in Moscow. Nor will it appoint as arbitrator a barrister who is in the same set of Chambers as
counsel for one of the parties, even though it may be argued that they are not partners but self-employed individuals.
(c) Repeat appointments
4. 88
One of the recurring problems in assessing the independence and impartiality of an arbitrator is that posed by the repeat
appointment of an arbitrator by the same party.
4. 89
The repeat appointment of arbitrators raises two issues. First, does the fact that an arbitrator is repeatedly appointed by the same
party or law firm mean that the arbitrator’s independence is compromised, because an important part of his or her income comes
from those appointments? Secondly, does it mean that the arbitrator’s impartiality is compromised?

Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638630...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
4. 90
The first issue would seem to be an issue of fact. How much does the arbitrator earn from the repeat appointments as opposed
to his or her income from other arbitrations or other sources? Or to put it more precisely, is the arbitrator so dependent on repeat
appointments by the same client or law firm as to bring his or her independence into question? In one case where an arbitrator
had received 18 per cent of his appointments in the last three years, and 25 per cent of his total income as arbitrator in the past
three years from cases involving the same party, the English Commercial Court upheld a challenge, considering that a fair-
minded observer would conclude that the arbitrator had, or appeared to have, a significant financial dependence or interest in
continuing to be appointed. 117
4. 91
The second issue is a more difficult one. Parties who are frequently involved in international arbitrations are likely to become
familiar with a particular arbitrator for a variety of reasons—reputation, expertise, familiarity with the relevant contractual terms
and conditions, approachability, and so forth—and they are likely to want to re-appoint that arbitrator when possible. The same
is true of the law firms who appoint arbitrators. They are likely to know arbitrators for whom they have a high regard, and others
that they would not appoint, even if their client pleaded with them with tears in their eyes to do so.
4. 92
Accordingly, it is not surprising that there are repeat appointments. But it is reasonable to assume that however much a party
might like the style, or the expertise, or the ability of a particular arbitrator, that party would not continue to appoint the same
arbitrator if he or she consistently decided against it. Similarly, law firms who value their clients would be unlikely to continue
to appoint arbitrators who consistently made awards against them. In short, however upright and honest the arbitrator may be,
there is always a real possibility of actual but unconscious bias by that arbitrator in favour of a party or of a law firm that
frequently nominates him or her as an arbitrator.
4. 93
It follows that when a party or a law firm makes repeated appointments of the same arbitrator, questions are almost certain to be
raised as to the independence and impartiality of that arbitrator. This reality is recognised by the IBA Guidelines which require
an arbitrator or prospective arbitrator to make a declaration under the Orange List if he or she has been appointed on more than
three occasions by the same counsel or by the same law firm in the last three years. 118  Some jurisdictions have taken an even
stricter approach. For example, the Paris Court of Appeal has set aside an award on the ground that the tribunal was not properly
constituted, due to the non-disclosure by an arbitrator of a single past appointment by one of the parties in a case involving a
third party, even though no award was rendered in that case as the parties had settled the dispute. 119
4. 94
The problem of repeat appointments is compounded in international firms where there are a large number of specialist arbitration
lawyers, since the pool of qualified arbitrators is not endless and a hard limit would seem to penalise such firms, especially
where the nominations are from parties represented by different partners of the firm operating in different continents. 120
4. 95
There is an added complication in certain business sectors, and notably shipping and commodity trading, where it is customary
for a party to appoint the same person repeatedly, from a relatively small group of experienced arbitrators. This issue is
recognised in the IBA Guidelines, which state at footnote 5:
It may be the practice in certain specific types of arbitration, such as maritime, sports or commodities arbitration,
to draw arbitrators from a smaller or specialised pool of individuals. If in such fields it is the custom and practice
for parties to frequently appoint the same arbitrator in different cases, no disclosure of this fact is required, where
all parties in the arbitration should be familiar with such custom and practice.
4. 96
This practice was also recognised by the UK Supreme Court in the Halliburton case, which was concerned with a challenge
to an arbitrator who had been appointed more than once by the same party. The case attracted considerable attention in the
international arbitration community and (somewhat exceptionally) five arbitral institutions intervened to make submissions to

Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638630...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
the Court. 121  Lord Reed, giving judgment for the court, referred to the interventions by GAFTA and the LMAA at paragraph
43: 122
The other interveners are GAFTA, which is concerned with agricultural commodities arbitration and which trains
and certifies arbitrators who must have extensive practical experience in the relevant trades, and LMAA, which is
an association of arbitrators concerned with shipping and trade arbitration and which produces arbitration terms
and procedures widely used for maritime arbitration in London. GAFTA explains that disputes often arise in chain
or string supply contracts and that arbitrations in such contracts, which often involve common issues of law or
fact, are regularly referred to the same arbitrator or arbitrators [ … ].
4. 97
In Halliburton, the UK Supreme Court was concerned with a ‘Bermuda Form’ arbitration (a special type of policy developed
in Bermuda in the 1980s which usually provides for London arbitration 123 ). One of the issues was the failure of an arbitrator
to declare an appointment by the same party, Chubb Bermuda Insurance Ltd in a second related arbitration. The Supreme
Court accepted that a Bermuda Form arbitration was a specialist form of arbitration but held that under English law multiple
appointments must be disclosed in such arbitrations, unless there was an agreement to the contrary by the parties. 124  In
short, Bermuda Form arbitrators were subject to the same rules of disclosure as other arbitrators in mainstream international
arbitrations.
4. 98
Repeat appointments are particularly problematic where an arbitrator has been appointed for a second time in relation to two
disputes where there is overlapping subject matter. This raises the potentially difficult issue of whether arbitrators are free to
disclose information about the first arbitration in the second arbitration. The short answer is that they are not free to do so,
without the consent of the parties, if the first arbitration has taken (or is taking) place on the basis that it was private and
confidential. Lord Reed, giving the judgment of the UK Supreme Court in Halliburton 125  said:
Where the information which must be disclosed is subject to an arbitrator’s duty of privacy and confidentiality,
disclosure can be made only if the parties to whom the obligations are owed give their consent. In such a
circumstance, if a person seeking appointment as an arbitrator in a later arbitration does not obtain the consent of
the parties to a prior related arbitration to make a necessary disclosure about it, or the parties to a later arbitration
do not consent to the arbitrator’s disclosure of confidential matters relating to that prospective appointment to
the parties to the earlier arbitration, the arbitrator will have to decline the second appointment. Such consent may
be express or may be inferred from the arbitration agreement itself in the context of the custom and practice in
the relevant field. 126
Lady Arden concurred in her judgment in the same case, citing with approval the following citation from Julia Dias KC: 127
[W]hether there is in fact a real possibility of bias depends on matters such as the identity of the parties to the two
arbitrations, the nature of the subject-matter, the degree of overlap between the issues and the type of evidence
adduced. The problem is that none of this can be explored without disclosing in the first arbitration matters relating
to the second arbitration which in principle should be confidential to that arbitration. Indeed, it is impossible to see
how the confidentiality of the second arbitration would not be compromised by the need to investigate whether
there is an overlap between the two references in relation to subject-matter, issues, etc.
4. 99
In addition to concerns about confidentiality, where an arbitrator has been appointed a second time in an arbitration with the
same party, arising out of the same event and with the same or similar issues involved, there is an obvious inequality of arms.
Specifically, the repeat arbitrator will be privy to information that neither the opposing party in the proceedings nor the other
members of the tribunal will know about or are entitled to know about. 128  Lady Arden highlighted this risk in the Halliburton
case: 129

Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638630...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
Such an appointment is likely to give rise to a potential inequality of arms and material asymmetry of information.
In principle the parties to both the current and proposed arbitration should be given a chance to object to the
arbitrator accepting the new appointment. And if there is more than one current arbitration in which the conflict
arises, there must if there is to be disclosure be disclosure to the parties in those arbitrations too.
4. 100
The same issue has arisen in investment arbitration. In one dispute, the same arbitrator had been nominated by claimant, insurer
Liberty Mutual, in two parallel investment arbitrations against Venezuela, first under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules and
then under the UNCITRAL Rules (Venezuela having failed to indicate to the claimant to which set of rules it had agreed
under the relevant treaty). Venezuela challenged the arbitrator’s appointment in the UNCITRAL arbitration based on ‘risk of
prejudgment and an information asymmetry with respect to the other co-arbitrators’. The Secretary-General of the Permanent
Court of Arbitration (the appointing authority) accepted Venezuela’s challenge noting that the arbitrator ‘may formulate views
on matters of fact and law in deliberations with the ICSID tribunal where his co-arbitrators in the UNCITRAL Arbitration would
not participate’ and that such situation could lead a reasonable and informed third party to ‘hold justifiable doubts regarding
the integrity of the proceedings’. 130  In a similar situation, the ICC Court disqualified the respondent’s nominee in the ICC case
Anaklia Development Corporation v Georgia 131  in light of that nominee’s appointment to the parallel ICSID arbitration Bob
Meijer v Georgia. 132  The Court reasoned that the nominee’s presence on both tribunals entailed a risk of prejudgment in the
ICC case and, again, a risk of asymmetry of information between the co-arbitrators.
4. 101
This discussion suggests that arbitrators who are offered repeat appointments should consider carefully whether or not to accept.
What looks like a precious gift may turn out to be a poisoned chalice.
Footnotes
94
See the discussion in Chapter 1. See LCIA Rules, Arts 5.3 and 10.1; ICC Rules, Art. 11.1; UNCITRAL Rules, Arts 11
and 12; ICDR Rules, Art. 14.1; SIAC Rules, Art. 13.1; HKIAC Rules, Art. 11.1; CIETAC Rules, Art. 24.
95
A comprehensive analysis of challenge and disqualification on grounds of both independence and impartiality under
each of the different arbitration rules can be found in Daele, Challenge and Disqualification of Arbitrators in International
Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2012), Chapters 7-8.
96
See, e.g., Swiss PIL, at art. 180.1.c. (This provision, amended in June 2020 and in force since 1 January 2021, states
that a member of the arbitral tribunal may be challenged ‘if circumstances exist that give rise to legitimate doubts as
to his or her independence or impartiality’.)
97
In Halliburton, the UK Supreme Court stated that the Court of Appeal had ‘developed the English law of arbitration’ by
holding that in addition to the legal duty of independence and impartiality there was also a legal duty upon an arbitrator
to disclose circumstances that would render him or her liable to be removed as an arbitrator and that the Court of Appeal
was correct to do so: Halliburton Co. v Chubb Bermuda Insurance Ltd (formerly Ace Bermuda Insurance Ltd.) [2020]
UKSC 48, at [75]–[76].
98
On the basis that the composition of the tribunal, including as it did someone who was not independent or impartial, was
not in accordance with the agreement of the parties: Model Law, Art. 34(2)(a)(iv); New York Convention, Art. V(1)(d).
99
See, for instance, Art. 21(1) of the Spanish Arbitration Act.
100
Model Law, Art. 12(1).
101
See ICS Inspection and Control Services Limited (United Kingdom) v Argentine Republic I, PCA Case No.2010-9,
Decision on Challenge to Arbitrator, 17 December 2009, at [22.2].
102
See ICSID and UNCITRAL’s Draft Code of Conduct for Adjudicators in Investor–State Dispute Settlement, Art. 10
(the Draft Code also provides that adjudicators should disclose all necessary information throughout the proceedings).
103
Paris cour d’appel, 29 May 2018, Case No. 15/20168.
104
Luiz Henrique de Souza Faria v Alper Consultoria e Corretora de Seguros, Court of Appeals of the State of São Paulo,
Proceeding No. 1056400-47.2019.8.26.0100, 11 August 2020.

Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638630...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
105
See IBA Guidelines, Explanation to General Standard 3, letter (a). See also LCIA Rules, Art. 5.4 where any arbitrator
is required to sign a written declaration whether there are any circumstances currently known to the candidate which
are likely to give rise in the mind of any party to any justifiable doubts as to his or her impartiality or independence
(emphasis added).
106
IBA Guidelines, Explanation to General Standard 3.
107
IBA Guidelines, Introduction at [2]; and the revised version issued in 2014, also at [2] of the Introduction. The reviewing
process of the Guidelines was initiated in 2012 by the IBA Arbitration Committee, conducted by an expanded Conflicts
of Interest Subcommittee composed of 27 individuals from diverse jurisdictions, and included counsel, arbitrators, and
arbitration users. The Subcommittee considered a number of issues that had received attention in the field since 2004,
including ‘advance waivers’, the so called ‘double hatting’, ‘issue’ conflicts, the independence and impartiality of arbitral
or administrative secretaries, and third-party funding. See IBA Guidelines, Preamble.
108
The 2015 International Arbitration Survey of the Queen Mary University of London showed that 71 per cent of the
respondents had seen the IBA Guidelines used in practice and 60 per cent of them found them to be effective. However,
the Eiser v Spain case (in which the ad hoc committee annulled an award against Spain following the claimant’s
nominated arbitrator’s failing to disclose his professional relationship with the claimant’s damages expert) serves as a
warning that those lists (which did not cover the scenario that arose in that case) are not exhaustive and that arbitrators and
parties must be proactive in thinking about what scenarios could create an appearance of bias and/or require disclosure.
See Eiser Infrastructure Limited and Energía Solar Luxembourg Sarl v Kingdom of Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/36,
Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee, 11 June 2020.
109
See IBA Guidelines, General Standard 1 and (2)(a).
110
See IBA Guidelines, Orange List, at [3.2.1]. This sounds a little like special pleading on behalf of the larger law firms.
Arbitral institutions such as the ICC, which have regard to the Guidelines but are not in any way bound by them, are
unlikely to appoint as an arbitrator the partner in a law firm that acts for one of the parties, however remote that partner’s
connection with the party may be.
111
See IBA Guidelines, Part II, at [2].
112
Ibid., Waivable Red List, at [2.2.2].
113
Ibid., Part II, at [3].
114
Ibid. at [7].
115
Ibid., Green List, at [4.4.2]–[4.3.3].
116
Whilst the Guidelines may not always be directly cited, they are nonetheless also present in the minds of the authorities
when deciding challenges. See for instance the decision of the English Commercial Court in W Ltd v M SDN BHD
[2016] EWHC 422 (Comm) and the decision by the Colombian Supreme Court in Tampico Beverages Inc. v Productos
Naturales de la Sabana SA Alqueria, SC9909-2017, Case No. 11001-02-03-000-2014-01927-00.In her Freshfields
lecture, Professor van Haersolte-van Hof, the Director-General of the LCIA, referred to the Guidelines as ‘not binding,
but an important source of soft law’. She also made the point that the situations in which perceived conflicts of interest
might arise were ‘generally very fact-specific, set in different industry sectors with different customs and practices, and
that standards differ depending on the phase of the proceedings and the time and place of review’. Her conclusion was
that ‘Guidance in codes of conduct and guidelines and case law is incredibly useful, but in my view we should accept
that hard and fast, universal rules are not realistic and not likely to be of much use’. Van Haersolte-van Hof, ‘Impartiality
and independence: Fundamental and fluid’ (2021) 37 Arb Intl 599, at 605 and 610.
117
Cofely Limited v Anthony Bingham et al. [2016] EWHC 240 (Comm).
118
See IBA Guidelines, Orange List, at [3.3.8].
119
Fn. 103.
120
For a discussion of the particular challenges facing international law firms in connection with conflicts of interest for
arbitrator appointments, see Fernandez-Perez, ‘Conflicts of interests of arbitrators in international law firms’ (2018)
34 Arb Intl 105.
121
They were the ICC and the LCIA, each represented by external counsel and, with written submissions only, the CIArb,
the LMAA, and the GAFTA.
122
Halliburton, fn. 97, at [43].
123
See Masters, Range, and Moura, ‘The Bermuda Form and arbitration of disputes in London’ (2018) 73(1) Disp Res
J 67 et seq.
124
Halliburton, fn. 97 at [137].
125
Ibid., at [88].
126
This last sentence presumably refers to the maritime and other arbitrations previously discussed, in which repeat
appointments are customary.

Section G. - Independence and Impartiality of Arbitrators, UKBC-REDFERN 530638630...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
127
Halliburton, fn. 97, at [189] quoting Dias, ‘Resignation in the face of confidentiality’ (2020) TDM 2 .
128
From experience, it is disconcerting when, as chair of an arbitral tribunal, you realise that one of your fellow arbitrators
already knows about the issues, the evidence, and the legal arguments likely to be put forward before you have even
been given the opportunity to read the initial pleadings.
129
Halliburton, fn. 97, at [172].
130
Liberty Seguros, Compañía de Seguros y Reaseguros v Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, PCA Case AA809, Decision
on challenge of arbitrator, 1 July 2021.
131
ICC Case No. 25542/HBH, Decision on the Proposal for Disqualification, 25 February 2021.
132
ICSID Case No. ARB/20/28.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
