“any interim or conservatory measure [the Tribunal] deems..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
“any interim or conservatory measure [the Tribunal] deems
appropriate”
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
“any interim or conservatory measure [the Tribunal] deems appropriate”
28-24
There is no set list of interim or conservatory measures that are available under the Rules. At the risk of some oversimplification,
one can distinguish three basic categories of conservatory and interim measures: (1) evidentiary measures; (2) financial measures
(including in particular security for costs); and (3) standstill measures. 476  These categories, which are referred to below, are
similar to those adopted in art.17 of the amended UNCITRAL Model Law. 477  This being said, there is no fixed list of provisional
and conservatory measures as stated in a procedural order of 2000 by the Tribunal in ICC case No.9691:
“[t]he categories of provisional or conservatory measures which may be granted in international arbitration are
not closed. These are broad and flexible remedies which may be tailored to meet the needs of parties in a wide
range of circumstances, particularly in the context of ICC arbitration.” 478
28-25
A Tribunal may only grant interim or conservatory measures that it is entitled to grant under the law of the place of arbitration
and any procedural order or award with respect to such measures will include an analysis of the lex arbitri. However, laws of
various countries are generally permissive in this respect. France, 479  Switzerland 480  and England 481  all provide for interim
relief. The US Federal Arbitration Act provides for measures to obtain evidence. 482
28-26
The authors are not aware of any case in which a Tribunal’s procedural order for interim relief or award for interim relief in
an ICC arbitration was successfully challenged in a state court. Nevertheless, if a Tribunal refuses to grant such relief, a party
may seek that relief or other relief from state courts under art.28(2). In addition, there is an issue of compliance with any order
or award for interim relief.
28-27
As regards the requirements for granting interim or conservatory measures under art.28(1), in the authors’ opinion a Tribunal
should ensure that the following conditions have been satisfied before it decides that the applicant deserves provisional
protection:
 
(a)There has been a request by a party setting out the reasons and providing adequate evidence for the relief sought against
another party to the arbitration;
 
(b)The Tribunal is satisfied that it has prima facie jurisdiction over both parties, based on the existence of a valid agreement
to arbitrate;
 
(c)The applicant has established the prima facie basis of a valid claim on the merits and there is therefore a likelihood of
success on the merits; 483
 
(d)There is a risk of imminent irreparable or substantial harm, which cannot be compensated by a subsequent award
damages; 484  and

“any interim or conservatory measure [the Tribunal] deems..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(e)The granting of the measure would not result in a pre-judgement of the case. 485
28-28
Set out below is a discussion of various interim and conservatory measures by category based on recent experience and materials.
However, as noted above, there is wide variation in the type of interim and conservatory measures that may be granted under
art.28.
Footnotes
476
More generally, see Poudret & Besson, op. cit., para.6.3, p.518; Lew, “Commentary on Interim and Conservatory
Measures in ICC Arbitration Cases” [2000] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.11 No.1, p.28; Yesilirmak, “Interim and Conservatory
Measures in ICC Arbitration Cases” [2000] ICC ICArb. Bull. Vol.11 No.1, p.31 including Extracts from ICC Awards
referring to Interim and Conservatory Measures; Reiner, “Les mesures provisoires et conservatoires et l’arbitrage
international notamment l’arbitrage CCI” (1998) JDI, p.853; Besson, Arbitrage international et mesures provisoires–
Etude de droit comparé (Schulthess, 1998); Goldman, “Provisional Measures in International Arbitration” (1993)
RDAI/IBLJ No.1, p.3; Giardina, “Provisional Measures in Europe—Some Comparative Observations” in Etudes de
droit international en l’honneur de Pierre Lalive, op. cit., p.499; Schwartz, “The practices and experience of the ICC
Court” [1993] ICC ICArb. Bull., Special Supplement, p.45.
477
Article 17(2) of the UNCITRAL Model Law provides the following definition: “(2) An interim measure is any temporary
measure, whether in the form of an award or in another form, by which, at any time prior to the issuance of the award
by which the dispute is finally decided, the arbitral tribunal orders a party to: (a) Maintain or restore the status quo
pending determination of the dispute; (b) Take action that would prevent, or refrain from taking action that is likely
to cause, current or imminent harm or prejudice to the arbitral process itself; (c) Provide a means of preserving assets
out of which a subsequent award may be satisfied; or (d) Preserve evidence that may be relevant and material to the
resolution of the dispute.”
478
Procedural Order No.7 of 2000 at para.43, which contained the following footnote: “S. Besson, Arbitrage international
et mesures provisoires, Zürich (1998) at pp.264–265; P. Lalive, J.-F. Poudret, C. Reymond, Le droit de l’arbitrage–
interne et international en Suisse, Lausanne (1989) at pp.362–365.”
479
In France, for example, art.1468 of the French CPC provides that: “[t]he arbitral tribunal may order upon the parties any
conservatory or provisional measures that it deems appropriate, set conditions for such measures and, if necessary, attach
penalties to such order. However, only courts may order conservatory attachments and judicial security. The arbitral
tribunal has the power to amend or add to any provisional or conservatory measure that it has granted” Translated by
Emmanuel Gaillard, Nanou Leleu-Knobil and Daniela Pellarini of Shearman & Sterling LLP. More generally, see Clay,
op. cit., pp.150–152.
480
In Switzerland, art.183(1) of the Swiss PILA provides that “[u]nless the parties have agreed otherwise,
the Arbitral tribunal may, at the request of a party, order provisional or conservatory measures”.
(Translation from: https://www.arbitration-ch.org/en/asa/asa-news/details/1086.english-translations-of-the-revised-
swiss-arbitration-act-and-associated-provisions-of-the-code-of-civil-procedure-in-force-on-1-january-2021.html
[accessed 17 August 2021]).
481
In England, s.38(4) of the English Arbitration Act 1996 provides that:“(4) The tribunal may give directions in relation
to any property which is the subject of the proceedings or as to which any question arises in the proceedings, and which
is owned by or is in the possession of a party to the proceedings–(a) for the inspection, photographing, preservation,
custody or detention of the property by the tribunal, an expert or a party, or (b) ordering that samples be taken from, or
any observation be made of or experiment conducted upon, the property.”
482
In the US, s.7 of the Federal Arbitration Act provides that: “[t]he arbitrators selected either as prescribed in this title or
otherwise, or a majority of them, may summon in writing any person to attend before them or any of them as a witness
and in a proper case to bring with him or them any book, record, document, or paper which may be deemed material
as evidence in the case.”
483
See art.17(A)(1)(b) of the UNCITRAL Model Law.
484
See art.17(A)(1)(a) of the UNCITRAL Model Law. Although a party’s prospective inability to satisfy a damage award
should be considered a factor.

“any interim or conservatory measure [the Tribunal] deems..., UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
485
Final award in ICC Case No.14287 (June 2008) (Extract), Part IV.11 paras 3 and 5 in Special Supplement 2011: Interim,
Conservatory and Emergency Measures in ICC Arbitration, 74.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
