Choice of law by the parties, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407014 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Choice of law by the parties
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Choice of law by the parties
21-7
Article 21(1) confirms the broad autonomy of the parties in the choice of the rules of law applicable to the dispute as well as
the freedom of the Tribunal to determine the law applicable in the absence of an agreement. For disputes based on contracts,
most parties agree on the law applicable to the contract. For Requests for Arbitration filed in 2020, the parties had agreed on a
choice of law clause in 95% of their contracts. In 98% of those cases a system of national law was chosen. The most common
national laws chosen were English law (122 cases) Swiss law (66 cases), US law (with New York law selected in half of the
contracts) (104 cases), French law (56 cases) and the laws of Brazil (42 cases). 115  As a result, ICC tribunals are much less
frequently called upon to decide upon the applicable law with respect to the contract. In many cases, the law applicable to the
relevant contract will also be the law that governs other aspects of the dispute, although, as mentioned above, this will depend
in particular on the terms of the choice of law provision agreed to by the parties.
21-8
The willingness of parties to agree on the applicable national law before a dispute has arisen is important, because there is a
need for legal certainty as to how a contract is to be interpreted and applied. This can be resolved by using a well-known legal
system (such as English, French or Swiss law) even if the underlying contract is not related to that legal system. It may also be
resolved by choosing the law of one of the parties as the choice of a law to govern the contract if it is well known by both.
21-9
Parties sometimes have a preference for one type of legal system over another. For example, many parties prefer either a civil
law system or a common law system or vice versa. However, whatever system is preferred, it is submitted that one of the relevant
factors for determining whether a party should accept the application of a particular system of law is the accessibility of legal
materials in that legal system. In this respect, there has been a considerable development of resources on the internet that render
national systems readily accessible although advice from local practitioners remains, of course, essential. 116
Footnotes
115
ICC 2020 Statistics, p.17.
116
Among the more complete systems, see, for example, the UK system (BAILLI) and the related Australian and Canadian
sites, as well as the various sources of American Law (Findlaw, Cornell), the Swiss system (http://www.bger.ch [accessed
17 August 2021]) and the French system (http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr [accessed 17 August 2021]).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
