“in appropriate circumstances even [after transmittal of the file]”, UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
“in appropriate circumstances even [after transmittal of the file]”
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
“in appropriate circumstances even [after transmittal of the file]”
28-72
After constitution of the Tribunal, a request for interim or conservatory measures should be made to the Tribunal except in
“appropriate circumstances”. Therefore, art.28(2) appears to anticipate the decision of a Tribunal and then either voluntary
compliance or enforcement under the New York Convention or pursuant to national court proceedings. This is consistent with
the approach that it is the Tribunal that is most familiar with the proceedings and is in the better position to judge whether
such measures are required.
28-73
In various national jurisdictions, there is support for the principle that a party should first make a request to the Tribunal before
going to court. 528  Two examples where there may be “appropriate circumstances” for making an application first to the national
court involve ex parte measures and requests for emergency relief.
28-74
As discussed above, under the ICC Rules, a Tribunal generally does not generally act ex parte (although a Tribunal may have such
power under the law of the place of arbitration if a provision such as art.17B of the UNCITRAL Model Law is applicable). 529
Therefore, to freeze a bank account a party may feel that it is necessary to go directly to a national court. Similarly, if a ship is
about to depart, then there may not be time to make an application to the Tribunal. 530  However, the availability of this remedy
will depend on the national courts and in some jurisdictions it may not be able to obtain freezing orders, for example, ex parte.
28-75
Although under art.28(2), an application to the national courts does not divest the Tribunal of jurisdiction to grant interim or
conservatory measures, the party taking such an initiative should nevertheless take care that its action will not be considered
as a waiver or violation of the arbitration agreement. It should also be aware that such an action may affect the willingness of
the Tribunal to grant the relief. 531
28-76
Several years ago, a Tribunal sitting in Paris and applying Swiss law to the merits of the dispute was requested by the claimant
to issue an interim measure of protection against the respondent in a dispute relating to the validity of the termination of a
distribution agreement for luxury branded goods. Subject to the final decision of the Tribunal, the claimant (and distributor)
contended that the agreement was to remain in force, and the respondent (and manufacturer) was not entitled to open a store
within the claimant’s territory. Prior to the start of the ICC arbitration, the claimant applied before the US District court for the
Southern District of New York which issued an Order: (i) temporarily restraining termination of the agreement; and (ii) enjoining
the respondent from refusing to perform its obligation under said agreement. The opening of the store was not restrained by the
New York Court’s Temporary Restraining Order (TRO). Shortly after, the claimant filed the Request for Arbitration, it submitted
a request for interim measures to the Tribunal, seeking namely that respondent: (i) be directed to perform the agreement; and
(ii) not to supply the store which the respondent had opened in the meantime pending the final award. The request was rejected
by the Tribunal as the claimant failed to demonstrate on a prima facie basis, any urgency or irreparable damages it would suffer
if its application was denied. The Tribunal felt the necessity to affirm its power to take such a decision based on the parties’
agreement despite the saisine of the New York court in the following terms:
“The Parties are in agreement that the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear the Claimant’s Application and
to order interim and conservatory measures. Although the arbitration agreement contained in Section … of the

“in appropriate circumstances even [after transmittal of the file]”, UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Distribution Agreement does not expressly confer such power, it follows from Article [28 (1)] of the ICC Rules
of Arbitration, which are incorporated in the Parties’ arbitration agreement. The Parties are also in agreement that
there exist no mandatory law at the place of arbitration, that is to say Paris, that would prevent or limit the Arbitral
Tribunal from exercising its power to grant interim relief.
The only question which may presently arise regarding the power of the Arbitral Tribunal to grant interim relief,
or rather whether it should make use of such power, relates to the TRO of the New York Court. The TRO was
issued before this Arbitral Tribunal was even constituted, and was heard before Judge [NN.] before this Arbitral
Tribunal had received the file. However, the TRO [Order] of the New York Court does not preclude the Arbitral
Tribunal from granting interim relief, given, in particular, the Parties’ agreement that it should do so.” 532
28-77
In another recent case, the Tribunal adopted the following reasoning regarding interim relief sought from a national court in
the presence of an arbitration agreement:
“If the state court orders or declines to order a measure, the parties cannot subsequently resort to the arbitral
tribunal to obtain a more favourable ruling, and vice-versa. Even if the state court was first approached solely
for the reason that the arbitral tribunal was not yet properly constituted, the tribunal cannot later on, after its
constitution, reverse or modify the measure ordered by the state judge. What if a subsequent request for reversal
or modification of an order is based on changed circumstances? Arguably, such a request should be dealt with by
the arbitral tribunal once it is constituted.” 533
28-78
This reasoning is convincing to the extent that it seeks to avoid a multiplicity of applications and it is with such applications
that international arbitration becomes more complicated and expensive. However, it does not address the issue of whether the
application may have been rejected based on a different procedural standard from that to be applied by the Tribunal.
Footnotes
528
See for example s.44 of the English Arbitration Act 1996 which provides for the primacy of the Tribunal when it states
with respect to applications to court that: “(3) If the case is one of urgency, the court may, on the application of a party
or proposed party to the arbitral proceedings, make such orders as it thinks necessary for the purpose of preserving
evidence or assets. (4) If the case is not one of urgency, the court shall act only on the application of a party to the
arbitral proceedings (upon notice to the other parties and to the tribunal) made with the permission of the tribunal or
the agreement in writing of the other parties. (5) In any case the court shall act only if or to the extent that the arbitral
tribunal, and any arbitral or other institution or person vested by the parties with power in that regard, has no power
or is unable for the time being to act effectively.” See also Cetelem SA v Roust Holdings Ltd, where an order freezing
respondent’s assets was granted on the basis of s.44(3) of the Act. Lord Justice Clarke, writing for the English Court of
Appeal’s ruling dated 24 May 2005, wrote: “I do not think that this decision in any way usurps the functions or powers
of the arbitral tribunal. The whole purpose of giving the court power to make such orders is to assist the arbitral process
in cases of urgency before there is arbitration on foot. Otherwise it is all too easy for a party who is bent on a policy of
non-co-operation to frustrate the arbitral process. Of course, in any case where the court is called upon to exercise the
power, it must take great care not to usurp the arbitral process and to ensure, by exacting appropriate undertakings from
the Claimant, that the substantive questions are reserved for the arbitrator or arbitrators” [2005] EWCA Civ 618.
529
See the discussion under para.28-6.
530
For an illustration, see the Re Application of Deiulemar, 198 F.3d 473, 480 (4th Cir., 1999), see para.28-8 fn.462.
531
More generally, on the waiver of the arbitration agreement, see Jarvin, “La renonciation à la convention d’arbitrage” in
Liber Amicorum Dobrosav Mitrovic (Belgrade, 2007).
532
ICC Case No.11770, Procedural Order No.1 (2001), unreported.

“in appropriate circumstances even [after transmittal of the file]”, UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
533
ICC Order No.5 of 2 April 2002, regarding Claimant’s Request for Interim Relief [2003] ASA Bull. Vol.21 No.4, p.810
at p.816.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
