Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638623 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 4 - Establishment and Organisation of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal
(a) Introduction
4. 182
There is much work to be done behind the scenes to ensure that an international arbitration runs smoothly. The arbitrators are
generally of different nationalities, as are the parties, their advisers, and experts. This mixture of nationalities is one of the most
intriguing challenges involved in the practice of international arbitration. It needs more careful planning and organisation to
bring together such a mixed group of people than it does to arrange a domestic arbitration. Indeed, if a final physical hearing
is to take place, its organisation has much in common with the arranging of a series of performances for a band embarking
upon an international tour: there is a venue to be arranged, times and dates to be fixed, hotel rooms to be booked, technicians
(in the form of interpreters, transcription services, IT support, and so forth) to be engaged. In the context of remote hearings,
the work is not greatly reduced. Hearing platforms need to be agreed and tested with the parties, arrangements for witness
and expert hearing need to be agreed, decisions need to be taken on the hiring of a specialised company to administer the
platform, and cybersecurity concerns need to be addressed. In both cases, the whole performance has to be organised so that,
when the time comes, the assembled cast of parties, lawyers, experts, and witnesses are ready to present their offerings to their
small, but important, audience—the arbitral tribunal. The work involved in making the administrative arrangements has led to
it becoming the established practice in larger and more complex international arbitrations for the arbitral tribunal to appoint a
tribunal secretary, whose function includes liaising with the parties to take care of the practical arrangements. 294
(b) Meetings and hearings
4. 183
Where the arbitral tribunal consists of more than a sole arbitrator, it is necessary for the members of the arbitral tribunal to
meet from time to time for consultation amongst themselves. There is no reason why such meetings should be held at the seat
of the arbitration or in person and if it is more convenient (or necessary) for the arbitrators to meet elsewhere or by remote
means (such as due to travel or sanitary restrictions), they may do so, subject to any provisions to the contrary in the submission
agreement or in the applicable rules of arbitration. 295
(i) Meetings and hearings at which the parties are present
4. 184
In all but the simplest cases, it is likely that in-person or video conference meetings will take place from time to time between
the arbitral tribunal, the parties, and their representatives, so that procedural orders or directions may be considered. Under
most applicable laws and institutional rules, the arbitral tribunal may decide to hold meetings with the parties outside of the
seat at the most convenient place or by video conference. However, the arbitral tribunal should consult the parties before
doing so. If the parties agree to hold all meetings and/or hearings at the place of arbitration, this should guide the tribunal. It
is nevertheless noteworthy that, in recent years, with the advances of video conferencing and the radical limitations on travel
due to the COVID-19 pandemic, most procedural meetings are held virtually without the need for a physical meeting. 296

Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638623 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4. 185
Unless the case is to be decided on the basis of documents only, there is also a final hearing, or a series of hearings, at
which the parties and their representatives attend physically or remotely in order to put forward the evidence of witnesses
and their legal arguments. 297  Physical witness hearings are generally held at the seat of the arbitration, although provision
is sometimes made for the hearing to take place elsewhere. 298  This may be the case, for instance, when another location is
closer to where the arbitrators and the parties’ representatives are based, or less common, when the evidence of an important
witness is required and it is more convenient for the tribunal and the parties to go to the witness than it is for the witness to go
to the tribunal. 299  Travel restrictions and other sanitary restrictions linked to the COVID-19 epidemic have obliged parties
and tribunals to seek alternatives to final hearings in person such as conducting entire final hearings remotely. The arbitration
community adapted rapidly to the complexity of organising such remote hearings which have generally run smoothly if
carefully organised in advance. One author recalls a final hearing in an ICC arbitration in Brazil in March 2009 which was
suspended halfway through by the tribunal due to the risk of travel bans. The participants returned to their countries of
residence and were ordered to make arrangements to resume proceedings remotely two weeks later. In spite of the challenges,
a hearing involving parties, counsel, and arbitrators located in ten different jurisdictions was successfully concluded by remote
meeting technology. Indeed, in 2020 and 2021 most final hearings have been conducted using such technology. This has led to
a great acceleration in the use of technology in arbitrations. Such remote hearings have often improved the efficiency and cost
effectiveness of arbitration proceedings and have contributed to a greener process with documents accessed electronically
rather than in hard copy and no carbon footprint from travel. 300
(ii) Fixing dates for hearings
4. 186
Where the arbitral tribunal consists of more than a sole arbitrator, the date of the hearing will generally be fixed by the
presiding arbitrator, in consultation with the co-arbitrators, the parties, and their advisers. It is inevitably difficult to coordinate
the agendas of arbitrators, parties, witnesses, and experts for a period that may be between one to three weeks. It is a useful
practice to fix target dates in the procedural calendar at the first procedural meeting, usually annexed to a procedural order,
and then to fix actual dates towards the close of pleadings, when both the parties’ lawyers and the tribunal will have a better
idea of the issues to be tried, the amount of evidence to be considered, the possible need for interpreters, and the number of
days to be set aside for the hearing. Once fixed, the target dates will hopefully help to concentrate the minds of counsel and
the arbitral tribunal on the need to get on with the case, if the target dates (or anything close to them) are to be met.
4. 187
If a reasonable agreement on a date for hearing cannot be reached between the parties and the arbitral tribunal, the tribunal
must fix a date without such agreement. There can be little objection to this, as long as the parties are given reasonable notice.
4. 188
In fixing this date, the sole or presiding arbitrator should take account of holiday periods in the countries of the participants,
and the seat of the arbitration. An arbitrator is unlikely to wish to work during important religious or family holidays in his or
her country of residence and should not unreasonably insist that others must do so during such periods in their own countries.
This is not a legal obligation; rather, it is a matter of courtesy and respect for the diversity of the other participants. It may
also be difficult—or even impossible, in some countries—to provide the necessary infrastructure at the seat for a hearing
on a public holiday.
(iii) Length of hearings
4. 189
In fixing a date for the start of the hearings, the sole or presiding arbitrator must keep in mind the length of time that the
hearing is likely to take. Indeed, this is a question that will be asked repeatedly when making travel and hotel arrangements,
when booking rooms in which the hearing is to take place, when making arrangements for the attendance of the parties and
their witnesses and when hiring video conference platforms and special equipment for remote hearings.

Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638623 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
4. 190
It is difficult to estimate accurately how long a case is likely to last, particularly in circumstances where it is unclear if the
hearing will be physical or remote. Since participants in a remote hearing are usually located in their own jurisdiction, there
are often multiple time zones to accommodate which can result in hearing days being much shorter than would be the norm
for physical hearings. 301  For all of these reasons, it is therefore safer to over-book time at the beginning of a case and then
release time later (if it appears that the hearing will not take up all of the allotted days) than it is to try to re-convene the entire
proceeding at a later date if insufficient time has been set aside. As in many procedural aspects, it is for the tribunal to strike a
balance between affording the parties a reasonable opportunity to present their case and not succumbing to some parties’ (or
counsel’s) tendencies towards procedural excess. One key tool at the arbitrator’s disposal to ensure that hearings are ‘kept
to time’ is what is known as the ‘chess clock’ system whereby the total hearing time is calculated and divided between the
parties (after allocating a block of time to the tribunal). 302
(c) Administrative aspects
(i) Physical hearings
4. 191
The place of the arbitration is chosen before any hearing is held but, unless the hearing is to be held remotely, it will be
necessary to fix a specific venue in appropriate premises offered by an arbitral institution, conference centre, or other suitable
building. In deciding on a venue, the primary consideration must be to find accommodation that is fit for the purpose. Two
requirements stand out. First, the venue must provide adequate space, not only for the arbitral tribunal, but also for the parties
and their lawyers, for screens, charts, drawings, and other documents, all of which may be voluminous, and for anyone else
who is to assist in the conduct of the arbitration, including experts, stenographers, and interpreters (and sometimes even
the public in investment arbitrations). 303  Electronic aids of one kind or another will also be deployed and the necessary
infrastructure should be available at the proposed venue. 304  Secondly, as far as possible, the facilities chosen must be
available for the purposes of the arbitration throughout the whole period of the hearing.
4. 192
For a physical meeting between the arbitral tribunal and the parties, one large hearing room will be required sufficient to
accommodate all the parties, their counsel, transcript writers, interpreters, and the tribunal and secretary. For a witness hearing
—particularly a hearing that is likely to last for more than two or three days—it is important for each party to be assigned a
private ‘break-out’ room in which it can store documents, check transcripts, print material, prepare for the next day’s hearings,
brief the client, and generally engage in the often frantic activity that goes on behind the scenes in any international arbitration.
The arbitral tribunal should also have a room available for its own deliberations, as it is often inconvenient or impracticable to
ask the parties to withdraw completely from the hearing room. In terms of security, the parties (and the tribunal) usually wish
to be able to leave documents at the venue without fear that they will be seen by others. Suitable accommodation for a physical
hearing, particularly if it is likely to be lengthy is not easy to find. Some of the commonly used alternatives are as follows.
(ii) Remote hearings
4. 193
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the entire arbitral community experienced notable developments in the conduct
of remote online hearings. 305  Several arbitral institutions prepared protocols or provided guidance on the organisation of
remote hearings. For instance, the ICC’s Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals expressly addresses the organisation of a
remote hearing, including the factors that tribunals should consider in order to ensure that parties are treated with equality
and that each party is given a full opportunity to present its case. 306  The ICC also issued a checklist for a protocol on remote
hearings and suggested clauses for cyber-protocols and procedural orders dealing with the organisation of virtual hearings,

Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638623 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
from the presentation of documentary evidence and examination of witnesses to online etiquette. 307  If the hearing is to
be held remotely, decisions will need to be taken on the preferred IT platform and technology to be used, whether certain
equipment is required in each location, and the need to establish a shared document platform containing an electronic hearing
bundle. Parties will need to agree on remote break-out rooms that will permit each side and the tribunal to confer privately
during the hearing. 308  Nowadays, a number of vendors offer their services to host virtual hearings, which include specialised
platforms and even the delivery of specialised equipment to counsel, the tribunal, and witnesses.
(iii) Arbitration centres
4. 194
Most major arbitration institutions and centres provide, or at least can recommend, accommodation that is suitable for almost
every type of hearing. Where one of the parties is a government or other state enterprises, it is worth considering whether
the arbitration can be brought within the facilities of either the PCA at the Peace Palace in The Hague, or of ICSID (that is,
the facilities of the World Bank in Washington or Paris). Even where an arbitration does not fall within the PCA Rules, the
Secretary-General of the PCA is generally willing to accommodate arbitrations, even between private parties. 309  Likewise,
World Bank rooms may also be available upon request in non-ICSID cases. 310
4. 195
Some of the established international arbitral institutions, such as the ICC, ICDR, and LCIA, can also provide hearing rooms.
The LCIA has arrangements with the International Dispute Resolution Centre (IDRC) in Central London which has fifteen
hearing rooms and over forty break-out rooms available. 311  The ICC also has its own arbitration facilities in Paris at the ICC
Hearing Centre, which is separate from the ICC secretariat. 312  The ICDR headquarters in New York can host eight hearings
at the same time, and that capacity is supplemented by ICDR’s offices in Miami, Houston, and Singapore. 313  The New
York International Arbitration Centre also rents rooms for arbitrations in New York. 314  Maxwell Chambers in Singapore can
accommodate up to four arbitration cases simultaneously, 315  whilst Arbitration Place in Toronto offers 16 different hearing
rooms of varying sizes. 316  Most of these arbitration centres also provide comprehensive support services and technology
for remote hearings. 317
(iv) Hotels
4. 196
If the seat of the arbitration is not within one of the leading arbitration venues, then it is common to rely on the leading hotels
of the city in which the arbitration is to take place for final ‘in person’ hearings. Such hotels are generally accustomed to
looking after business visitors and offering conference or other function rooms, Wi-Fi, photocopying, catering, and other
services. Again, a critical concern is to ensure that the same room is available for the duration of the hearing to avoid room
changes mid-hearing and that access to it is strictly controlled, so that confidential documents may be left in it overnight or
during breaks in the proceedings.
(v) Interpreters
4. 197
It should be regarded as a fundamental right of a party or a witness to speak at a hearing in his or her mother tongue. 318  Indeed,
some witnesses may be unable to express themselves easily, if at all, in the language of the arbitration. In such circumstances,
it is necessary to arrange for professional interpreters to be available, so that the witnesses may give testimony in their own
language. Arrangements for the engagement of interpreters are usually undertaken by the party who requires their services
or the arbitral institution. If a witness is to give evidence through an interpreter, it is usual to notify both the arbitral tribunal
and the other party of this fact well in advance of the hearing to ensure that necessary arrangements are made.

Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638623 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
4. 198
The use of an interpreter will almost certainly slow down the proceedings. This is something that the arbitral tribunal should
consider when assessing the duration of the hearing. If the witness has some command of the language of the arbitration,
then the witness may use the interpreter simply to help him or her to understand the questions and formulate the answers.
With modern technology, simultaneous interpretation can work well, particularly where the facilities (such as those of ICSID)
are especially designed for its use. Indeed, it is becoming ever more frequent to hold bilingual arbitrations in investment
arbitrations, whereby there is interpretation into two of the Centre’s official languages simultaneously. 319
(vi) Transcripts
4. 199
A verbatim transcript, particularly of the evidence, can be of great importance in international arbitrations in which the
members of the arbitral tribunal may have different levels of comprehension of the language of the proceedings. Indeed, the
experience of the authors is that parties’ counsel rely heavily on transcripts of the proceedings, when they are available, for
the purposes of preparing closing speeches and post-hearing submissions and that arbitrators refer to them in drafting the
award. 320  Transcripts also constitute a permanent record of the proceedings, which may be beneficial later if, for example,
a vacancy on the arbitral tribunal has to be filled, or if there are subsequent court proceedings for recourse against, or for
enforcement of, the award.
4. 200
Transcripts are prepared by means of professional transcript writers. There are well-known systems, whereby the lawyers’
pleadings, the testimony of the witnesses, and the tribunal’s interventions are shown instantaneously on laptop computer
screens available to the participants in the hearing room. This can be very useful (particularly for counsel during a cross-
examination). For most arbitrators, however, the value of the transcript lies in its availability during the deliberations and for
reference in drafting the award. In addition to the live transcript, a more refined copy of the transcript is sent electronically
to the parties and the tribunal—on the same evening of each hearing day if required (and at an additional cost). This assists
both counsel and the tribunal to prepare for the next day’s hearing.
(vii) Hearing hours
4. 201
In most countries, judges sit in their courts for only a relatively short period each day: perhaps no more than five hours. This
is sensible in that it allows judges time to read through their notes of the evidence and argument, and to reflect on what they
have heard and what they would like to hear. Judges also have other duties to perform. Relatively short working hours also
allow the parties and their advisers essential time in which to produce any evidence, information, or data that the court may
request, and it also gives them time to prepare for the next session.
4. 202
This practice is not generally followed by tribunals at final physical hearings where hearing days of seven or eight hours are
not uncommon. The reason for this is to minimise the multiple costs of the final hearing exercise resulting from lodging and
feeding large teams of counsel, witnesses, and experts a long way from home.
4. 203
In order to ensure that the assigned hearing time is effectively used, the ‘chess clock’ system is frequently adopted. Typically,
the first day of the hearing will be dedicated to opening speeches from each party, usually of two to three hours’ duration.
Similarly, the last day may be reserved specifically for closing speeches (although there has been a tendency to replace
closing speeches with post-hearing briefs which allows the physical hearing to be used for what is most useful—the hearing
of live witnesses and experts). The total number of hearing hours for the balance of days is then calculated. From that total
time assigned breaks (usually 90 minutes a day) and a reasonable estimate of tribunal time must be deducted. Tribunal time
(typically one hour per day) would include the time needed to address procedural issues, tribunal questions, and procedural

Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638623 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
accommodations, for example an early close on one hearing day to avoid a witness testifying over two days. The balance is
then divided between the parties 321  to employ in direct examination of their own witnesses and experts and cross examination
of the opposing parties’ witnesses and experts as each party sees fit. As a consequence, a hearing day of 9am to 5pm (eight
hours) would result in party time of 5.5 hours (that is, eight hours minus 1.5 hours for breaks and one hour for tribunal time)
which gives 2.75 hours per party. For a five-day hearing, four of which would be dedicated to oral evidence, each party
would have eleven hours. At the end of each day, the tribunal secretary (or tribunal) will be asked to provide the parties
with an update on how much time they have used so that priorities can be assigned for the remaining period of the hearing.
This process is an effective guarantee against hearings overrunning and has the salutary effect of concentrating the minds of
counsel as to what is really important in the case and what is peripheral.
4. 204
The ‘chess clock’ system also works for remote hearings, albeit based on shorter hearing hours (typically four to five hours)
to accommodate time differences and the inevitable ‘screen fatigue’. 322
(d) Other considerations
(i) Relations between the parties and the arbitral tribunal during the hearing
4. 205
An international arbitration provides a less formal method of resolving disputes than proceedings before national courts.
There are more opportunities for interactions between the parties, their lawyers, and experts on the one hand and the members
of the arbitral tribunal on the other. This is something to be encouraged, provided that contacts take place openly. It is perfectly
normal and reasonable for the parties and their counsel to converse with the members of the arbitral tribunal in coffee breaks,
provided that such conversations are public and do not raise any issue concerning the case (sport, weather, and the quality
of the coffee are always safe topics!).
(ii) Functions of the presiding arbitrator
4. 206
The presiding arbitrator acts as chairperson of the tribunal and will often be referred to as ‘the president’ or ‘the chair’, not
only in the established rules of arbitration, but also by the parties and their lawyers during the course of the proceedings. 323
The task of the presiding arbitrator is to take charge of the deliberations of the tribunal, and of the conduct of any meetings
and hearings. It is the presiding arbitrator’s responsibility to make sure that the proceedings move forward as smoothly and
effectively as possible.
4. 207
Depending on the rules under which the arbitration is being conducted, the presiding arbitrator may have no more than a voice
equal to that of the co-arbitrators when it comes to making decisions, but the presiding arbitrator is nevertheless ‘first amongst
equals’. If fees are fixed on a lump sum basis, the presiding arbitrator will generally receive a larger fee than the co-arbitrators,
because of the greater investment in time involved, including drafting the tribunal’s communications with the parties and the
initial draft of the award(s). 324  If the arbitrators’ fees are based on an hourly rate, the presiding arbitrator is likely to be paid
more than the co-arbitrators, because of the additional hours that he or she will be required to dedicate to the case.

Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638623 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
(e) The tribunal secretary
4. 208
As already indicated, the conduct of an international arbitration will generally involve the sole or presiding arbitrator in
a considerable number of administrative tasks, including ensuring that proper arrangements have been made for meetings,
interpreters, transcript writers, and so forth.
4. 209
It is essential for the smooth running of the arbitration that these arrangements should be made in good time and it has become
the practice, particularly in large and complex international arbitrations, for the tribunal to appoint a tribunal secretary both to
assist with arrangements that would otherwise fall to be made by the tribunal and to act as a link between the parties and the
tribunal. 325  Remote hearings may also create significant administrative work, from the circulation of connection details, to
the coordination of break-out rooms, finalisation of electronic hearing bundles, and verification of the identity of every person
connecting to the online platform.
(i) The role of the tribunal secretary
4. 210
The tribunal secretary will normally take part in all meetings of the arbitral tribunal as well as the hearings, to ensure that
the various administrative procedures are running smoothly.
4. 211
The legitimate limits of the role and function of a tribunal secretary have been the subject of much debate within the arbitral
community. 326  Some commentators take the view that the role of the tribunal secretary should be limited to the purely
administrative; others consider there is nothing wrong in an arbitrator delegating more substantive tasks to a secretary, in the
same way as national judges have, for many years, made use of judicial clerks. 327  Notwithstanding such differences, there
is broad consensus that a tribunal secretary should be appointed only with the knowledge and consent of the parties, and that
it remains the responsibility of the arbitral tribunal to ensure that its decision-making function is not delegated in any way.
The task is to assist the arbitral tribunal, not to usurp its function. 328
4. 212
These considerations, and the increased use of tribunal secretaries, have prompted arbitral institutions to address their role and
duties through their arbitral rules. The LCIA Rules now contain a specific provision on tribunal secretaries establishing that
the arbitral tribunal may obtain assistance from them, as long as the decision-making function is not delegated; moreover, all
tasks carried out by a tribunal secretary should be carried out on behalf of and under the supervision of the arbitral tribunal. 329
The draft rule 34 of the proposed amendments to the ICSID Rules now clarifies that the secretary may even assist the tribunal
in its deliberation. 330
4. 213
Even in an administered arbitration, many detailed arrangements still fall to be made by the arbitral tribunal itself and the
assistance of a tribunal secretary is extremely valuable in this regard. According to the ICC’s Note to the Parties and Arbitral
Tribunals on the Conduct of Arbitration (of January 2021), the tasks of the tribunal secretary can include:
 
• transmitting documents and communications on behalf of the arbitral tribunal;
 
• organising and maintaining the arbitral tribunal’s file and locating documents;
 
• organising hearings and meetings and liaising with the parties in that respect;
 
• drafting correspondence to the parties and sending it on behalf of the tribunal;

Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638623 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
 
• preparing for the arbitral tribunal’s review drafts of procedural orders as well as factual portions of the award, such as
the summary of the proceedings, the chronology of facts, and the summary of the parties’ positions;
 
• attending hearings, meetings, and deliberations; taking notes or keeping time;
 
• conducting legal or similar research; and
 
• proof-reading and checking citations, dates, and cross-references in procedural orders and awards, as well as correcting
typographical, grammatical, or calculation errors. 331
4. 214
All of these tasks free up the arbitral tribunal to focus on its core role of carefully listening to and reviewing the evidence,
and weighing up the arguments, in order to reach a decision on the merits. When a tribunal secretary is appointed, a special
arrangement may need to be made to meet the related fees and expenses. 332
(ii) Whom to appoint
4. 215
The obvious person to appoint as a tribunal secretary is a lawyer with some experience in international arbitration and of the
procedural and administrative problems that may arise during the proceedings. The usual practice is for the arbitral tribunal
to choose its own secretary, who is generally (although not invariably) a young practising lawyer based in the same city as
the presiding arbitrator (and, where the presiding arbitrator works for a firm, often an associate from that firm). A moderate
hourly fee is paid appropriate to the nature of the duties.
4. 216
It is important to obtain the agreement of the parties before any appointment is made, with a clear explanation to the parties
of the nature of the secretary’s role and the benefits that such an appointment will give to the process, in terms of efficiency
and cost savings. Some arbitral institutions offer clear guidelines on how to appoint arbitral secretaries. 333
(iii) Costs of a tribunal secretary
4. 217
One of the key reasons for using a tribunal secretary is to save costs for the parties. It is uncontroversial, therefore, for the
Young ICCA Guide on Arbitral Secretaries to record as ‘a general principle’ that ‘the use of an arbitral secretary should
reduce rather than increase the overall costs of the arbitration’. 334
4. 218
What this means in practice is likely to depend on the applicable arbitration rules. Where the arbitral tribunal is remunerated
based on the amount in dispute, the fees, and perhaps the expenses, associated with the tribunal secretary are more
appropriately borne by the tribunal, rather than the parties. Where the tribunal is remunerated on an hourly basis, the costs and
expenses associated with the secretary may be more appropriately borne by the parties, owing to the costs saving achieved
by having routine tasks performed at a lower hourly rate by the secretary.
Footnotes
294
For a discussion of the role and functions of a tribunal secretary, see paragraphs 4.208ff.
295
The UNCITRAL Rules give the arbitral tribunal complete freedom in this respect: see Art. 18.2. So also do the LCIA
Rules: see Art. 16.3. See Chapter 3, paragraph 3.57. In the practice of ICSID arbitration, the meetings do not necessarily

Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638623 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
take place at the seat of the Centre. The 2022 rules provide that the first session ‘may be held in person or remotely, by
any means that the Tribunal deems appropriate’ (r. 29(2)). If the hearing is to be held in person, ‘it may be held at any
place agreed to by the parties after consulting with the Tribunal and the Secretary-General’ (r. 32(3)).The deliberations
of the tribunal may be conducted ‘at any place and by any means it considers appropriate’ (r. 34(2)).
296
This is to be encouraged where the amounts in dispute are limited and the costs of organising the meeting are
considerable.
297
For a more detailed account of the issues to consider for a final oral hearing, see Chapter 6.
298
See, e.g., the UNCITRAL Rules 2013, Art. 18.2; LCIA Rules, Art. 16.3.
299
This may be the case if witnesses are unable to travel for health reasons, if travel restrictions are in place, or if the
witnesses are high-ranking government officials or ministers. However, once again, it is now increasingly common for
witnesses who, for good reason, cannot be physically present to be heard by video conference. During the COVID-19
pandemic, the use of cameras showing a 360° view of the room where the witness or expert is situated has facilitated
the conduct of remote virtual hearings by proving that there are no third parties present.
300
In 2019, the Campaign for Greener Arbitrations was launched, an initiative to reduce the carbon footprint of arbitrations
through behavioural change. See https://www.greenerarbitrations.com/.
301
By way of example, one of the authors recently participated as counsel in a case from Washington, DC. Opposing counsel
were in Paris and the arbitrators were in London, Mexico, and Honolulu. In order to ensure reasonable hearing times,
the arbitration took place for four hours each day.
302
We discuss the ‘chess clock’ system at paragraph 4.203 below.
303
Some new free trade agreements and BITs require hearings be open to the public. For instance, in Gramercy Funds
Management LLC and other v Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. UNCT/18/2), a public hearing was held pursuant to
Art. 10.21(2) of the United States-Peru Free Trade Agreement of 1 February 2009. In Vattenfall AB and others v Federal
Republic of Germany, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/12, the parties agreed for the hearing to be open to the public.
304
Such as real-time transcript or another form of recording, and PowerPoint or other software (e.g. Trial Director) to
display documents on a screen.
305
See Bassiri, ‘Conducting remote hearings: Issues of planning, preparation and sample procedural orders’, in Scherer,
Bassiri, and Wahab, fn. 72, Chapter 5.
306
See ICC, ‘Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration’,
1 January 2021, Section VII(C). See also CIArb, Guidance Note on Remote Dispute Resolution Proceedings; The Seoul
Protocol on Video Conferencing in International Arbitration; AAA-ICDR, Virtual Hearing Guide for Arbitrators and
Parties; HKIAC, Guidelines for Virtual Hearings; SIAC, Taking Your Arbitration Remote; Vienna International Arbitral
Centre, The Vienna Protocol: A Practical Checklist for Remote Hearings.
307
Available 
at 
https://iccwbo.org/content/uploads/sites/3/2020/12/icc-checklist-cyber-protocol-and-clauses-orders-
virtual-hearings-english.pdf.
308
The platform administrator will usually place each individual connected to the hearing into the relevant break-out room
at the appropriate time. It is important that each counsel team (and the arbitrators) retain a discipline to make sure
that they are in the relevant break-out room before making any comments. This task is facilitated by each participant
preceding their name on screen with their affiliation (usually C for claimant, R for respondent, and T for tribunal—
e.g. C–John Smith, R–Jane Jones, and T–Rachel Wood). If a participant finds themself in the wrong break-out room,
he or she should immediately alert all others present and contact the administrator so that no party conversations are
inadvertently overheard.
309
The PCA has hearing facilities in the Netherlands, Buenos Aires, Mauritius, and Singapore. In addition, the PCA has
access to facilities around the world pursuant to its host country agreements with Contracting Parties and cooperation
agreements with other institutions (for instance the Inter American Court of Human Rights in San José, Costa Rica, or
the Florence Chamber of Commerce in Italy). See https://pca-cpa.org/en/services/hearing-facilities/.
310
The World Bank room rentals are included in ICSID’s administrative fee in cases administered by ICSID under the
ICSID, UNCITRAL, or other rules. See https://icsid.worldbank.org/services/hearing-facilities.
311
See https://www.idrc.co.uk/. The IDRC recently moved to new premises at 1 Paternoster Lane in the City of London.
312
See https://iccwbo.org/dispute-resolution-services/hearing-centre/.
313
See http://www.adr.org.
314
See https://nyiac.org/planning-a-hearing/reservations/.
315
See https://www.maxwellchambers.com/.
316
See https://www.arbitrationplace.com/.
317
See https://icsid.worldbank.org/services/hearing-facilities/virtual-hearings; and https://iccwbo.org/dispute-resolution-
services/hearing-centre/icc-virtual-hearings/.

Section I. - Organisation of the Arbitral Tribunal, UKBC-REDFERN 530638623 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
318
It is not unreasonable, however, for an arbitral tribunal to require a party who wishes to engage lawyers to retain
representatives who are able to perform their functions in the working language of the arbitration.
319
In such cases, each party may present using its own language with submissions being simultaneously translated into
the other language. For example, in a case involving an English-speaking claimant against a Latin American state, the
claimant’s counsel will present in English (which presentation will be simultaneously interpreted into Spanish) and
the respondent’s counsel will present in Spanish (which presentation will be simultaneously interpreted into English).
Similarly, witnesses can give evidence in either language with simultaneous interpretation into the other language. It is
quite common in such cases to have live transcripts in both languages simultaneously.
320
It is usual to give such references by citing the day, page, and line of the transcript (e.g. ‘Day 5, page 70, line 15’).
Audio recordings are usually kept as well (and sometimes even video recordings when using online platforms for virtual
hearings).
321
A 50:50 split is usual but if the number of witnesses and experts presented by each party is radically different then a
50:50 split may be adjusted accordingly. In any event, each party is made aware of the total number of hours available
to it for direct examination and cross examination prior to the hearing commencing.
322
See ICC, ‘Note to Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of the Arbitration under the ICC Rules of Arbitration’,
1 January 2021, para. 102.
323
Usual forms of address may be ‘Madame President’, ‘Madame Chair’, ‘Mister President’, ‘Mister Chairman or simply
‘Sir’ or ‘Madame’.
324
For a comprehensive review of the functions of the presiding arbitrator, see Kaplan and Mills, ‘The role of the chair in
international commercial arbitration’, in Pryles (ed.) The Asian Leading Arbitrators’ Guide to International Arbitration
(JurisNet, 2007), Chapter 6. See also Reymond, ‘The president of the arbitral tribunal’ (1994) 1 ICSID Rev—Foreign
Investment LJ 1.
325
The increased acceptance and use of tribunal secretaries are evidenced in part by recent revisions to leading arbitral
rules. For instance, the LCIA Rules explicitly regulate the appointment, functions, and fees of the tribunal secretaries
in its Art. 14A. A 2015 survey indicates that, overall, arbitral secretaries are used in 53 per cent of international
arbitrations, and 71 per cent of the respondents considered tribunal secretaries to be useful: see the survey carried out by
the school of arbitration of Queen Mary University of London and White and Case LLP, Improvements and Innovations
in International Arbitration (2015), p. 42.
326
For a more comprehensive analysis, see Jensen, Tribunal Secretaries in International Arbitration (Oxford University
Press, 2019).
327
In 2017, the English Commercial Court considered the issue of the appropriate role of tribunal secretaries. The judge
said: ‘An arbitrator who receives the views of a tribunal secretary does not thereby necessarily lose the ability to exercise
full and independent judgement on the issue in question’ but he recommended that secretaries should ‘not […] be tasked
with anything which involves expressing a view on the substantive merits of an application or issue’. See P v Q and
others [2017] EWHC 194 (Comm).
328
See Partasides, ‘Secretaries to arbitral tribunals’, in Hanotiau and Mourre (eds) Players’ Interaction in International
Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2012), p. 87. See also ICDR Rules, Art. 17: ‘The tribunal may, with the consent
of the parties, appoint an arbitral tribunal secretary, who will serve in accordance with ICDR guidelines.’
329
See 2020 LCIA Rules, Art. 14A.
330
See ICSID, Proposals for Amendments of the ICSID Rules, Working Paper No. 5, 15 June 2021, p. 307.
331
See the duties listed in ICC, ‘Note to the Parties and Arbitral Tribunals on the Conduct of Arbitration’, 1 January 2021,
para. 185. See also Young ICCA Guide on Arbitral Secretaries (2014), Art. 2. In what in practice may amount to a
limitation on the use of tribunal secretaries, the ICC will require the fees, but not the expenses, of a tribunal secretary
to be paid by the tribunal and will not reimburse them.
332
Note that some arbitration rules contain express provisions on this regard. See, e.g., LCIA Rules, Art. 14A.
333
See ICC Note, fn. 331, at paras 218–221.
334
Young ICCA Guide on Arbitral Secretaries, fn. 331, at Art. 4(1).
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
