Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution
A Practical Guide to Effective Dispute Resolution: Methods & Clauses 1st Ed.
Mainwork
Part 3 - Managing Disputes Effectively: Strategic Insights and Technological Advances
Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution
Overview
11-001
Psychology plays a crucial and multifaceted role in commercial dispute resolution, influencing emotions, communication,
decision-making, and the overall potential for settlement. Possibly more than the legal issues, the emotional, cognitive and
behavioural characteristics of the parties can significantly impact the process and outcome of any dispute resolution method.
Often ignored in preparing a dispute resolution strategy, psychological factors have a substantial influence on how commercial
disputes can escalate and become more difficult to resolve. Collectively, the parties’ emotions, perceptions, biases and
communication styles significantly contribute to their willingness and ability to negotiate, as well as their satisfaction with the
outcome. 1  An ability to manage these characteristics will also determine whether a negotiator or mediator can narrow the gap,
de-escalate a conflict and, ultimately, reach a settlement.
If appearing in court or before an arbitral tribunal, counsel needs to bear in mind that the psychology of the judge or arbitrators
can also have a determinative effect on the outcome of the dispute. 2  The impact of psychology is so great that it does raise the
question of why the psychology of persuasion does not form a more integral part of training for lawyers.
One of the hidden problems that comes under the umbrella heading of psychology is that humans may see or hear the same
words but perceive them differently. This is because although they are sensing the same stimuli, this sense is then passed through
a perception filter that is an internal model of the world. The meaning that the brain perceives depends almost entirely on this
model, which will have been constructed through the perceivers’ lived experience or schema. Hence, a different mix of genetics,
family circumstances, friends, personality, temperament and experience can result in, quite literally, different meanings being
perceived from the same words received. 3
If this is overlayed with the appearance and tone of the speaker, the issues multiply. Once you add the natural tendency for
people to favour information that confirms their pre-existing beliefs and to ignore evidence that contradicts those beliefs (this
phenomenon is called “confirmation bias” 4 , 5 ), it is no wonder that the outcome of some meetings (or hearings) can be totally
unexpected.
The meaning of words
11-002
In the context of dispute resolution, the importance of the “meaning” of words is clear. The problem is how meaning is
determined. This is worth a philosophical detour with reference to “Through the Looking Glass”, 6  where Alice says to Humpty
Dumpty “‘I don’t know what you mean by ‘glory’”. Alice did not agree with Mr Dumpty’s response and, when challenged, he
responded “When I use a word, it means just what I choose it to mean—neither more nor less.” Alice then says “The question
is whether you can make words mean so many different things.” Humpty Dumpty replies: “The question is which is to be
master—that’s all.”

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Humpty Dumpty’s statement embodies a philosophical issue about language: does the meaning of a word reside in its agreed-
upon definition, or does an individual have the power to bend it to their will? Most importantly, the person with the power (or
who the word is meant to affect), can determine whatever they want a word to mean (within obvious limits). This principle
often explains why misunderstandings happen. The obvious problem for dispute resolution is that if the parties were able to
define words and that their definition was the “right” one, then reliable communication becomes impossible.
Whoever gets to define words holds a certain control over a conversation. In English court, for example, the rules of statutory
interpretation (and the judge’s understanding of common language) apply. Overlaying the case law principles of interpretation
to the meaning of contracts, the intended meaning can generally be resolved. 7
However, when it comes to written or oral communication between the parties, the problem of potentially subjective meaning
becomes very real, and confirmation bias often leaps into action. This can unconsciously affect the perception of meaning,
where one party’s motivation is assumed based on an expectation of what they were expected to say which, in turn, is often
affected by how a party may have behaved in the past. 8
The take-away here is to ensure that any communications, especially offers and responses, are checked for ambiguity and clarity.
Emotions in commercial disputes
Introduction
11-003
Emotions play a vital role in human decision-making and behaviour and are particularly important in conflict situations.
Commercial disputes often involve high stakes, complex issues and interpersonal relationships, which can trigger various
emotions in the parties, such as anger, fear, frustration, resentment or anxiety. These emotions can have both positive and
negative effects on the dispute resolution process.
On the one hand, emotions can motivate the parties to seek resolution and to respond to the other parties’ interests and needs.
They can also signal the importance and urgency of the issues and may gain empathy and compassion from the other side
or from the judge or arbitrator. On the other hand, if unchecked, emotions can affect a party’s judgment and their behaviour.
The most negative affect is to cause a party to behave impulsively or aggressively.
As a result, emotions can also create barriers to communication and understanding, and increase the likelihood of
misunderstanding and misinterpretation.
Dealing with emotions
11-004
It can be very difficult for a party or counsel to overcome emotional reactions. There is clearly the potential for crocodile
tears 9  but, once an assessment is made that emotions being displayed are genuine, a conscious strategy of dealing with them
is necessary. Any attempts to address emotions run the risk of being perceived to be superficial and disingenuous.
One of the most important requirements is not to deny the validity of the emotions but to acknowledge them and show respect
and empathy. Whilst there may be occasions where this is misplaced, on balance, the effect is likely to be positive if a party
has a real desire to reach a settlement out of court. This is not the same as agreeing that the basis for the emotions is valid
but simply that they are a genuinely held belief. One of the clear benefits of employing a skilled mediator is that there is an
opportunity for the parties to vent their emotions in a safe and controlled environment and for the mediator to convey the
strength of feeling but to neutralise the use of emotive words.

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Whilst emotions in a commercial context are not likely to be the same as, for example, in a family dispute, one of the roles of
a neutral facilitator or mediator is to help the parties identify and express their underlying future interests and needs, rather
than focusing on their positions and demands. If this is achieved, there is a good chance that emotions will subside.
Perceptions and biases in commercial disputes
11-005
Another psychological factor that influences how commercial disputes escalate and become more difficult to resolve is the
way the parties perceive and interpret the situation, the issues, and the behaviour and messages from the other side. Perceptions
and interpretations are not objective or neutral but are shaped by various cognitive biases and heuristics that simplify and
distort reality. 10  Some of the common biases that can affect the parties in commercial disputes are as follows. 11
Confirmation bias
11-006
The tendency is for parties to seek, interpret and remember information that confirms their existing beliefs or hypotheses
and to ignore, discount or forget information that contradicts them. 12  The pervasiveness of this form of bias goes beyond
the parties and there is a risk that it can affect how a judge or tribunal perceive the dispute both in terms of its substance,
as well as the possible outcomes.
This is acknowledged in a report from the UK Houses of Parliament, 13  which noted:
“Psychologists have identified a large number of cognitive biases, many of which are relevant to court room
proceedings.” 14
Whilst the level of confirmation bias varies from person to person, it is difficult to address as it is deep-seated. From a
cognitive psychology perspective, this stems from our brains craving efficiency and disliking dissonance. In essence, it is
much easier to process information that aligns with what we already believe. The second problem is that emotionally charged
situations amplify this bias. Self-preservation drivers and an inbuilt ego-defence mechanism means that we selectively filter
information to preserve our sense of self or protect our interests.
As an aside, when explaining or describing confirmation bias, social psychologists tend to concentrate on the influence of
social interactions and lived experience, whilst cognitive psychologists tend to focus on understanding the mental processes
and mechanics of how we acquire and use knowledge. As a result, if confirmation bias is discussed with a cognitive
psychologist, their explanation is likely to be much simpler and boil down to the view that confirmation bias is a mental
shortcut with our brains being wired to be efficient and, as a result, to prefer information that confirms existing beliefs.
When processing persuasive messages, it then follows that this bias leads us to pay more attention to, and better remember,
arguments that support our views and to discount or dismiss opposing viewpoints, even if they have merit.
In the end, it does not matter how it is explained as both schools of psychological thinking accept that confirmation bias
exists, and this can make us resistant to persuasion, especially when egos are involved.
A further psychological phenomenon that can amplify confirmation bias is the characteristic of overconfidence. This is a
tendency to overestimate the accuracy of our own knowledge or past decisions. The risk of overestimation is increased if the
people involved on either side of the dispute are successful in their field. This can apply to the parties, as well as to the neutrals.
Given the hidden nature of this bias, there is also a risk that decision-makers, even those in seemingly neutral roles like
mediators or arbitrators, may fall prey to the bias. As a result, they might unconsciously favour interpretations aligning with
their pre-formed expectations.
The overall effect of confirmation bias, and the resulting hardened stance, is that it can lengthen negotiations, obstruct
productive dialogue and increase the likelihood of costlier outcomes like litigation.

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
Self-serving bias
11-007
This is a tendency to attribute one’s own successes to internal factors, such as skills or abilities, and one’s own failures to
external factors, such as luck or circumstances. Conversely, the tendency is for a party to attribute the other side’s successes
to external factors, and their failures to their own internal factors, such as incompetence or dishonesty. The relevance of
this to dispute resolution is that if mediation or negotiation involves individuals who are close to the dispute (and may be
responsible for the cause of it), any concessions are likely to be limited, as self-serving bias could come into play, and this
would act against any motivation to make concessions.
This is one of the reasons for introducing escalation clauses early in the negotiation process where the settlement discussions
are moved to a management level above that of the individuals directly involved. Apart from diluting the risk of self-serving
bias interfering with settlement discussions, this also has the benefit of potentially allowing the parties to look beyond the
immediacy of settling the dispute and to focus on the outcomes rather than the issues.
Reactance and threat rigidity response
11-008
When first threatened with legal action, the natural tendency is for an opposing party to push back aggressively and, in so
doing, to escalate the dispute. There are a number of psychological principles behind this including “reactance”, 15  “defensive
aggression” and “threat rigidity response”. 16
Reactance manifests itself in various forms, including emotional, cognitive and behavioural responses. 17  Emotionally,
individuals experiencing reactance may feel angry, hostile or aggressive. Cognitively, they might exhibit increased
attractiveness towards the restricted option or devalue an imposed option (including settlement proposals). Behaviourally,
reactance can lead to direct restoration of the threatened freedom, aggression towards the source of the threat, or observation
of others engaging in the behaviour that was restricted.
Several factors influence the degree of reactance, such as the importance of the threatened freedom, the magnitude of the
threat and cultural differences. Research has shown that individualistic cultures are more sensitive to personal freedom threats,
while collectivist cultures are more responsive to collective freedom threats.
Reducing reactance can be challenging but possible through various strategies. Providing individuals with a sense of choice,
using less controlling language and fostering empathy can mitigate reactance. Additionally, understanding the possible
triggers of reactance and tailoring communication to minimise perceived threats to freedom can be effective. In the context
of a commercial dispute, a “threat to freedom” is an alternative way of saying a claim or a legal demand for a particular
action to be carried out. The theory of reactance predicts that the greater the threat (described as a “removal of freedom”),
the greater the reaction.
A threat rigidity response is when, confronted with a perceived threat, entities (individuals, teams, companies) often become
fixated on established routines and struggle to consider new approaches. This rigidity hinders their ability to respond
effectively to the threat. In the context of dispute resolution, a threat rigidity response can manifest itself as a form of paralysis
in response and a refusal to consider any compromise to resolve the dispute.
Social identity theory
11-009
An aggressive response by a company to a legal claim (often seen in letters found from solicitors rejecting all claims and
threatening legal costs if the claim is pursued in court) can be described as “defensive aggression”. This can stem from

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
the social psychology inside a corporation where social influence and group dynamics affect individual behaviour. The
psychology behind this is referred to as something called social identity theory. 18
The core principle here is that individuals derive part of their concept of self from the groups they belong to. As the company
culture defines the group’s norms, values, and goals, in turn, their “social identity” motivates them to act in ways that conform
to group values. This is in the belief that this will benefit the group.
In order to be seen positively by their “in-group”, managers tend to behave in ways that align with the company culture in order
to gain approval and avoid being seen as outsiders. 19  This helps explain how a corporate culture that prioritises toughness
or dominance might pressure individuals to respond aggressively to legal challenges, even if it is not in the company’s best
interest.
Once this is recognised, when developing a dispute resolution strategy, it can be useful to consider how resolution of a dispute
may affect the individual(s) on the other side and to identify the benefits to their company, if the dispute were to be settled
out of court. These benefits can go beyond pure financial considerations.
Confirmation bias can also show up at the start of the dispute as a result of each party, convinced of their own rightness,
digging in their heels by focusing on the evidence (or perceptions) that support their case. When combined with reactance and
threat rigidity response, if not addressed, this can quickly narrow the space for compromise or creative solutions. This shines
a light on the importance of trying to shift the frame of reference as early as possible and to focus on mutually beneficial
outcomes.
Practical advice for mitigating confirmation bias
11-010
The simple recognition that confirmation bias exists can be a powerful first step. Sharing the possibility of the existence of such
biases (on both sides!) and getting the issue out in the open can be a useful mitigating step. Ideally, parties should be reminded
that they are not immune and encouraged to challenge themselves to stay open-minded throughout the resolution process.
If confirmation bias is encountered, a natural thought is that it can be changed by providing hard factual evidence that shows
that the biased belief is wrong. This may have the intended effect but, if this is planned, you need to be aware of a reported
psychological phenomenon referred to as the “backfire” effect. 20  This is where factual proof of the falseness of a bias is reported
to have had the effect of reaffirming the bias itself. However, an extensive study of research that was subsequently carried out
cast doubt on the existence of a true backfire effect. 21
Whilst being aware of the possibility of “backfire”, it is recommended that victims of confirmation bias still seek out evidence
to prove that the bias is wrong. The question then becomes how to present this. The presentation will have a significant impact
on how these new “facts” are received.
It is self-evident that deeply held beliefs connected to a person’s identity or mental model will be the hardest to change. However,
in most commercial disputes, such beliefs are not likely to be of that nature but, nevertheless, confrontational methods, whilst
possibly removing a specific belief, may tend to further polarise the dispute. As such, it is recommended that a more effective
approach is to present the evidence in a respectful, empathetic way.
Having brought the new evidence/facts to the table, there is a good chance that the recipient will display a number of responses
that could initially be perceived as making things worse. If a party finds themselves in this situation, they are better off, if they
are prepared and do not overreact.
Typical responses can include an immediate outright rejection of the evidence. This defence mechanism of denial protects
against the discomfort of having core beliefs challenged. The next stage, being cognitive dissonance, is more difficult as it
involves a state of mental distress when confronted with two conflicting ideas. People might try to minimise the impact of the
contradictory evidence by discrediting the source or finding minor flaws to rationalise dismissal of the evidence.

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
If this happens, such attempts to dismiss the evidence are best handled calmly and, if there are minor flaws, to acknowledge them
but then highlight that they do not affect the overall conclusion. It should also be noted that people in a heightened emotional
state are less likely to accept contradictory evidence.
The denial stage can move to individuals feeling threatened and, as a result, becoming more defensive. This can be displayed
as anger or, in line with the psychology of ego defence and anxiety avoidance, there is a good chance that the party who is
being required to change, shifts the blame onto the bearer of contradictory information or the world at large. There can also
be a tendency to bring up unrelated or new matters or to go over old ground. This is a variation on the “and another thing…”
type of response.
It is important that, during this part of the process, the “innocent” party remains focused on the outcomes of potentially resolving
the issue and does not succumb to what may be natural tendency to gloat or to effectively continue to poke the other party
with sharp sticks.
Moving out of the tunnel of negotiation, if a party moves to a bargaining phase, this change in position should be seized on,
and an attempt should be made to find compromises that allow that party to maintain a semblance of their original belief.
Care has to be taken here but gently allowing a party to reinterpret facts and modify parts of their (now proven) false belief,
or compartmentalise the contradiction, can be a wise move to allow the settlement discussions to move to a satisfactory and,
ideally, mutually beneficial conclusion.
If there is a final acceptance, it is worth noting that this is not simply the other party changing their mind but, at a deeper
level, potentially having to reorganise their belief system. This can involve integrating new information and evolving their
perspective. Depending on the nature of the dispute and how emotionally invested they are, there can even be semblances of
a sense of grief over their previous belief.
In the context of long-term dispute resolution, if facts that were originally disputed or ignored are finally accepted, it is best to
respond to the conceding party with a forward looking or “outcome focussed” response and to try to reinforce the conceding
party’s concession as a positive, mutually beneficial step.
Anchoring and the primacy/recency effects
11-011
Anchoring is the tendency to rely too much on the first piece of information offered, such as an initial offer or demand, and
to adjust insufficiently from that anchor point. 22
The primacy effect refers to the tendency of a party to better remember information presented at the beginning of a list or
sequence. 23  The first things we hear or see make a stronger impression and are easier to recall later. This is accompanied by
the recency effect, which describes the tendency to better remember the most recent information presented. Our short-term
memory allows us to easily recall the last things we encountered. There is a similar effect found in first impressions formed
when meeting people. 24  Of relevance to how parties come across when they first interact, it is also established that changing
first impressions is very difficult. 25
In dispute resolution, it is likely that the messages set out at the start of a letter (or speech), or are contained in the closing
paragraphs, are more likely to register and remain in the reader’s mind after they have finished the document. In turn, these
initial/closing sentiments are more likely to impact the reader when they deliberate or discuss how to respond.
The anchoring affect can also run alongside something called the framing effect, 26  which is a tendency to be influenced by
the way a problem or a choice is presented, such as whether it is framed in terms of gains or losses, risks or opportunities, or
costs or benefits. 27

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
Dealing with bias
11-012
Whilst the explanations of bias might seem to be remote academic theories, in practical terms, they are easy to recognise. The
challenge is what can be done. The main thing is that parties need to do is be aware of the principles and actively to consider
how they could adjust their approach to dispute resolution in order to minimise or, at least, anticipate and interpret potential
reactions from the other side in a different light.
There is no magic button that can address or reverse the biases set out above. However, although the most appropriate response
can be heavily dependent on the circumstances and the psychology of both parties, there are some practical approaches that
should be considered.
In considering how to address bias, any tactic needs to be deployed carefully, as there is a delicate balance between influencing
the negotiation subtly without making the other party feel manipulated. Overall, it is essential to resist the urge to directly accuse
the other side of being biased. If accusations are made, the outcome will almost certainly be to worsen the relationship and
inadvertently reduce the effectiveness of the attempts to resolve the dispute.
Recognising that some bias is inevitable, it is also important to choose your battles. This means determining which biases are
likely to be most disruptive to the negotiation, and to focus your efforts accordingly. It can be very difficult but it is also helpful
to put oneself in the other party’s shoes. Understanding how they might see the situation should help tailor responses effectively
but, in doing this, you also need to make sure you are aware of your own biases and the risks of assuming what someone may
be perceiving based on your own view of the world.
Whilst considering options, it is critical to understand one’s own potential biases, as there is always the possibility that the
problem of bias is on your side. Hence, the advice below is structured to help overcome self-bias as well as to address the
potential bias in others.
Identifying bias
11-013
There are early signs that a party’s arguments are overly focused on confirming existing beliefs. Appearing to dismiss factual
information that does not support their stance can signal confirmation bias. If a party tends to attribute any successes solely to
themselves and to put all blame at the feet of external factors (or the other party), this can be an indication of self-serving bias.
Whilst there may be pros and cons in any proposed settlement, if there is a sense that a party becomes resistant or defensive
when offered what is believed to be a creative mutually beneficial choice and their dismissal seems to have no substance, this
can appear to be a possible reactance.
Counteracting confirmation bias
11-014
There is a tendency to try to confront contradictory information head-on. If it comes to a hearing, this can be the correct (and
often the best) approach. However, during negotiations or attempts to settle out of court, if this is done bluntly or in a way
that can be perceived as threatening someone’s credibility or ego, it can make the negotiations even more difficult. A better
approach is to try and reframe the information by presenting it in a context that more closely aligns with their current viewpoints
or effectively sources the information through an authority that is both independent and credible. This is one of the benefits
of early neutral evaluation.

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
De-escalating threat rigidity
11-015
This can be difficult to address given that it can stem from the other party’s own environment, but the best approach is for a
party to focus on building trust and reducing any perceived threats to the ego or sense of control of the other party. This can be
helped by acknowledging their concerns and emphasising that finding a solution is mutually beneficial.
Managing reactance
11-016
The main principle of a response is to steer the other party indirectly towards the desired outcome by framing it as their own
choice or idea. One tactic can be to provide a list of options that includes your preferred option but not to identify your preference.
Allowing the other party to narrow the choice down and express their preference can get very close to the intended objective
of them perceiving that the final choice is their idea.
Addressing social identity bias
11-017
The psychological question here is whether the parties perceive themselves as being in the same “group”. At the start of a
dispute, almost by definition, the parties will see themselves in different groups. Emphasising the best outcome, including the
mutual benefits of continued business, can help to create the desired sense of being in the same group. Similarly, highlighting
past examples of successful cooperation between the parties may help. It is important not to do anything that pushes the party
further away by highlighting the differences in position but to focus on the areas of common ground.
Undermining anchoring
11-018
One possibility is to counter an unreasonable opening offer with an equally extreme counter-offer in the opposite direction,
shifting the range of what seems acceptable. This can help remove the anchoring but also has the potential to polarise and
increase reactance. A more logical way is to reframe their opening offer such that it no longer appears only to contain an extreme
starting point but that this point appears to be part of a basket of settlement requirements that are more reasonable.
Informing the mediator
11-019
If the biases are encountered in the context of a mediation, it can help to discreetly share observations on the opposing party’s
biases with the mediator. A skilled mediator can then develop strategies to neutralise those biases. Drawing on their neutrality,
these can include introducing counterbalancing information or reframing proposals in ways that mitigate the opposing party’s
biases without making them defensive.

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
Reactive devaluation
11-020
This is the tendency to devalue or reject a proposal or an offer from the other side, simply because it comes from the other side,
regardless of its objective merit or value. 28  Parties displaying reactive devaluation reject proposals raised by the counterparty
with no regard to the quality and reasonableness of the proposal. The occurrence of reactive devaluation decisions can stifle
proposal exchanges that are essential to successful settlement. This effect does not tend to apply to the same extent to ideas
generated by a third-party neutral but understanding the principle of people preferring ideas they generate themselves can be
helpful in most situations.
An equivalent (and perhaps more widely referred to) phenomena is what is known as the Not-Invented-Here-Syndrome. This
bias stems from a need for control and a sense of superiority, making people less receptive to external ideas. Having identified
a settlement proposal, an obvious mitigation in negotiation (or mediation) is to try and find a way to plant the idea in the other
party’s mind, so that they perceive that they have developed the idea themselves. If successful, the parties will collectively
benefit from one side knowing that they generated the idea and the other side perceiving that they did. The benefit this brings
is what is referred to as “ownership bias”, which is a tendency for people to overvalue and prefer things that they feel they
own or create. The risk to both parties is that a downside of ownership bias is that a party can prefer their own idea, even if
other options are objectively better.
As with a lot of biases, an awareness of the potential problem is a significant step towards finding a solution.
Impact on third party facilitators
11-021
Mediators and negotiators need to be aware of these cognitive biases and heuristics, and how they affect the parties’ perceptions
and interpretations. They also need to avoid falling prey to such biases themselves, and to challenge their own assumptions and
beliefs. Some of the strategies that can help mediators and negotiators overcome cognitive biases are:
 
• Asking open-ended and probing questions to elicit more information and clarify the parties’ interests.
 
• Providing feedback and reality testing to the parties and helping them to examine the consequences and alternatives of
their choices.
 
• Introducing new or different information or perspectives that can challenge or contradict the parties’ existing views or
expectations.
 
• Reframing the issues or the options in a different way and highlighting the positive aspects or the potential benefits of
resolution.
 
• Encouraging the parties to adopt the other side’s perspective, and to consider how they would react or respond if they
were in their shoes.
 
• Using objective criteria or standards to evaluate the issues or the options, and to justify or explain the proposals or the
offers.
Communication styles in commercial disputes
11-022

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
A third psychological factor that influences how commercial disputes escalate and become more difficult to resolve is the
way the parties communicate with each other, and the way they interpret and respond to each other’s communication.
Communication styles can depend on various factors, such as personality, culture, gender, education, profession or context.
Different communication styles can affect the parties’ preferences and expectations regarding the form, content, tone and
purpose of communication. Some of the common dimensions of communication styles are:
 
• Directness v indirectness: the degree to which the speaker expresses their thoughts, feelings and intentions clearly and
explicitly, or relies on hints, implications and nonverbal cues.
 
• High-context v low-context: the degree to which the speaker relies on the shared background, knowledge and assumptions
of the listener, or provides explicit and detailed information and explanations.
 
• Formality v informality: the degree to which the speaker adheres to the rules, norms and etiquette of communication, or
uses casual, personal or colloquial language and expressions.
 
• Assertiveness v cooperativeness: the degree to which the speaker pursues their own goals, interests and preferences, or
accommodates the goals, interests and preferences of the listener.
 
• Emotionality v rationality: the degree to which the speaker expresses their emotions, feelings and attitudes, or focuses
on facts, logic and evidence.
Different communication styles can affect the parties’ ability to convey and receive messages effectively, and to build rapport
and trust with each other. They can also affect the parties’ perception and interpretation of each other’s communication, and
their reactions and responses to each other. Different communication styles can lead to misunderstandings, misinterpretations
or conflicts, especially when the parties are not aware of or sensitive to the differences.
Mediators and negotiators in particular need to be aware of the communication styles of the parties, and how they affect their
communication behaviour and expectations. They also need to adapt their own communication style to suit the situation and
the parties, and to avoid imposing their own communication style on the parties. Some of the strategies that can help mediators
and negotiators deal with communication styles in commercial disputes are:
 
•Observing and listening to the parties’ verbal and nonverbal communication and identifying their communication
preferences and expectations.
 
•Adapting and matching the parties’ communication style and using appropriate language, tone and gestures to
communicate with them.
 
•Clarifying and confirming the parties’ messages and ensuring that they understand each other correctly and completely.
 
•Providing feedback and coaching to the parties and helping them to improve their communication skills and strategies.
Time, money and resources in commercial disputes
11-023
One of the most important practical factors that can affect the parties’ decision-making and behaviour in commercial dispute
resolution is the cost-benefit analysis of the process and the outcome. The parties have to weigh the costs and benefits of pursuing
or resolving the dispute, in terms of time, money and resources, and compare them with the alternatives, such as litigation,
arbitration or doing nothing. The parties also have to consider how much resource they are willing and able to invest in the
dispute resolution process, and how much time, money and resource they can expect to gain or lose from the outcome.
With reference to the biases set out above, a mediator needs to recognise and address psychological barriers to settlement and
use techniques to try to de-escalate emotions and reframe positions. A basic objective of mediation is to help parties understand
each other’s perspectives and move beyond entrenched positions. The way that mediation should be structured is to allow parties
to express concerns and emotions without fear of public exposure.
The cost-benefit analysis of the dispute resolution process and the outcome can affect the parties’ motivation and incentives
to resolve the dispute, as well as their expectations and demands regarding the outcome. The parties may be more motivated

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
and incentivised to resolve the dispute if they perceive that the benefits outweigh the costs, and that the outcome is fair and
reasonable. The opposite also applies.
A potential problem can arise if the consequence of failure is not the same for both parties. It is common to find such a power
imbalance that can distort behaviour. This is especially true, if one party has deeper pockets and if they are less affected by
any delay in resolution.
Mediators and negotiators need to be aware of the cost-benefit analysis of the parties, and how it affects their decision-making
and behaviour. They also need to help the parties to conduct a realistic and accurate cost-benefit analysis, and to consider the
consequences and alternatives of their choices. Some of the strategies that can help mediators and negotiators deal with time,
money and resources in commercial disputes are:
 
•Asking the parties to estimate the time, money, and resources they have spent or invested in the dispute so far, and the
time, money and resources they expect to spend or invest in the future.
 
•Similarly, asking the parties to estimate the value of what they can expect to gain or lose from the outcome of the dispute
resolution process, and the outcome of the alternatives, such as litigation, arbitration or doing nothing.
 
•Helping the parties to compare and evaluate the costs and benefits of pursuing or resolving the dispute, and to consider
the risks and uncertainties of the process and the outcome.
 
•Helping the parties to identify and prioritise their interests and needs, and to distinguish between their essential and
desirable goals and outcomes.
 
•Helping the parties to generate and explore options for resolution that can maximise their benefits and minimise their
costs, and that can address their interests and needs.
Reputation, relationships and future opportunities in commercial
disputes
11-024
Another important practical factor that can affect the parties’ decision-making and behaviour in commercial dispute resolution
is the impact of the process and the outcome on their reputation, relationships and future opportunities. To achieve an effective
dispute resolution, the parties should consider how the process and the outcome of the dispute resolution will affect their image,
credibility and trustworthiness in the eyes of their stakeholders, such as customers, suppliers, partners, employees or competitors.
They also have to consider how the process and the outcome of the dispute resolution will affect their relationship with each
other, and their ability and willingness to cooperate or collaborate with each other in the future and their prospects for future
business or growth.
The potential impact of the dispute resolution process and its outcome on a party’s reputation, relationships and future
opportunities can affect that party’s preferences, expectations and aspirations. In turn, this can affect a party’s preferences for
a dispute resolution process/outcome that is best for them personally rather than a pure financial gain. An understanding of
these, sometimes hidden, factors can help the parties anticipate or create more effective solutions that, if considered purely on
a financial basis, otherwise might not seem rational.
When considering proposals, parties would do well to consider, even ask about, what other factors the counterparty values that
might influence how a settlement can be reached. This aspect (gaining an insight into what is really important to both parties)
is an essential element of how a mediator can add value.

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
Impact on negotiation
11-025
As there is typically no third party in negotiation, the impact of psychological factors on the parties’ perceptions of power
dynamics can have a large effect on their willingness to compromise. One aspect of a power imbalance is that a party may be
consciously or subconsciously affected by the fear of failure and how they will be perceived by others.
In commercial disputes, preserving a working relationship can be crucial. Negotiations influenced by positive psychological
interactions tend to be more collaborative and, in turn, this can lead to an effective resolution that is mutually beneficial. It is
essential that the psychology of the parties is explored in detail in order to achieve the most effective resolution of the dispute.
Footnotes
1
J. Evans, Hypothetical Thinking–Dual Processes in Reasoning and Judgement, Classic Edition (Abingdon: Routledge,
Taylor & Francis Group, 2020), Ch.1, “The Psychology of Reasoning”.
2
D.E. Vincent and K. Reichert, Arbitration–The Art & Science of Persuasion, 1st edn (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2022), Ch.2, “The Key to Persuasion: Arbitrator Attitudes and Beliefs”.
3
P. Lindsay and D.A. Norman, Human Information Processing–An Introduction to Psychology, 2nd edn (New York:
Academic Press, 1977), Ch.16, “Social Interactions, Attribution Theory & Forming Impressions”.
4
Evans, Hypothetical Thinking–Dual Processes in Reasoning and Judgement (2020), Chapter 2, “Hypothesis Testing”.
5
M.E. Oswald and S. Grosjean, “Chapter 4. Confirmation Bias” in R.F. Pohl (ed.), Cognitive Illusions: A Handbook on
Fallacies and Biases in Thinking, Judgement and Memory (London: Psychology Press, 2004).
6
Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass, and What Alice Found There (1871), Ch.6.
7
Wood v Capita Insurance Services Ltd [2017] UKSC 24; [2017] A.C. 1173; Arnold v Britton [2015] UKSC 36; [2015]
A.C. 1619: if language is clear and unambiguous, the court must apply it, even if the outcome might seem commercially
unreasonable. Commercial common sense should only prevail, if there is omission or ambiguity. A court’s primary task
is to identify the objective meaning of the language the parties used. This can involve considering textual meaning within
the context of the document’s purpose and the relevant background.
8
Emily Balcetis and Gordon B. Moskowitz (eds), The Handbook of Impression Formation–A Social Psychological
Approach (Abingdon: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, 2023).
9
The phrase “crocodile tears” has its roots in ancient beliefs that crocodiles would cry while eating their prey. The origins
are not clear, with some believing the tears were a deceptive tactic used to lure in unsuspecting animals, others thought
tears represented a strange form of remorse the crocodiles felt; the most plausible explanation is that crocodiles have tear
ducts that help lubricate their eyes when they have been out of the water for extended periods. Understanding whether
an opponent is a crocodile is clearly important.
10
Albert Moukheiber (translated by Anne-Sophie Marie), Your Brain Is Playing Tricks on You: How the Brain Shapes
Opinions and Perceptions (London: Hero, Legend Times Group, 2022) (first published in French as “Votre cerveau vous
joue des tours” (Allary Éditions, 2019)).
11
Jean-Paul Caverini, Jean-Marc Fabre and Michel Gonzelez (eds), Cognitive Biases (Amsterdam, North-Holland:
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., 1990).
12
David W. Green, “Confirmation Bias, Problem Solving and Cognitive Models” in Caverini, Fabre and Gonzelez (eds),
Cognitive Biases (1990), Ch.31.
13
Houses of Parliament, Parliamentary Office of Science & Technology , Unintentional Bias in Court (October 2015),
POSTnote, No.512.
14
T. Gilovich et al. (eds), Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment (Cambridge University Press, 2002).
15
Sharon S. Brehm and Jack W. Brehm, Psychological Reactance A Theory of Freedom and Control (New York: Academic
Press, 1981), Ch.1, p.3; Eric S. Knowles and Jay A. Linn, Resistance and Persuasion (Hove: Psychology Press, Taylor
& Francis Group, 2008).
16
B.M. Staw et al., “Threat Rigidity Effects in Organizational Behavior: A Multilevel Analysis” (1981) 26(4)
Administrative Science Quarterly 501.

Chapter 11 - Psychology and Dynamics of Dispute Resolution, UKBC-EFFDIS 549291551...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
17
C. Steindl, “Understanding Psychological Reactance, New Developments and Findings” (2015) 223(4) Zeitschrift für
Psychologie 205 , doi.org/10.1027/2151-2604/a000222.
18
Michael G. Pratt, “Chapter 2: Social Identity Dynamics in Modem Organizations: An Organizational Psychology” in
Michael A. Hogg and Deborah J. Terry (eds), Social Identify Processes in Organizational Contexts (Hove: Psychology
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2012).
19
H. Tajfel “Experiments in intergroup discrimination” (1970) 223 Scientific American 96; H. Tajfel and J.C. Turner “An
integrative theory of intergroup conflict” in W.G. Austin and S. Worchel (eds), The social psychology of intergroup
relations (Monterey, CA: Brooks-Cole Publishing Company, 1979), pp.33–37.
20
S. Lewandowsky et al., “Misinformation and its correction: Continued influence and successful debiasing” (2012) 13
Psychological Science in the Public Interest 106, doi.org/10.1177/1529100612451018.
21
Briony Swire-Thompson et al., “Searching for the Backfire Effect: Measurement and Design Considerations” (2020)
9(3) J. Appl. Res. Mem. Cogn. 286, doi.org/10.1016/j.jarmac.2020.06.006.
22
Jean-Paul Caverini and Jean-Luc Peris, “Chapter 2: The Anchoring-Adjustment Heuristic in an Information Rich,
Real World Setting” in Caverini, Fabre and Gonzelez (eds), Cognitive Biases (1990); A. Tversky and D. Kahneman,
“Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases” (1974) 185(4157) Science 1124, 1128.
23
M. Glanzer and A.R. Cunitz, “Two storage mechanisms in free recall” (1966) 5(4) Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior 351; B.B. Murdock, “The serial position effect of free recall” (1962) 64(5) Journal of Experimental
Psychology 482.
24
David E. Melnikoff and John A. Bargh, “Ch.10. Impression Formation, Right Side Up” in Balcetis and Moskowitz, The
Handbook of Impression Formation–A Social Psychological Approach (2023).
25
Gordon B. Moskowitz et al., “Chapter 18. The Updating of First Impressions” in Balcetis and Moskowitz, The Handbook
of Impression Formation–A Social Psychological Approach (2023).
26
A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice” (1981) 211(4481) Science 453.
27
D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk” in Handbook of the fundamentals
of financial decision making: Part I (Canada: World Scientific, 2013), pp.99–127.
28
Sai On Cheung et al., “Reactive Devaluation as a Psychological Impediment to Construction Dispute
Negotiation” (2020) 36(4) J. Manage. Eng. 04020025.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
