Section B. - Commencement of an Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638625 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section B. - Commencement of an Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 4 - Establishment and Organisation of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section B. - Commencement of an Arbitration
(a) Introduction
4. 05
The commencement of an arbitration is a significant step not merely as evidence of a real conflict between the parties, but also
in terms of compliance with any applicable limitation period for the presentation of claims.
4. 06
Time limits for bringing legal proceedings are imposed by the laws of most countries. The interest of the state is that litigation
(or arbitration) should be started within a reasonable time of the events that gave rise to it. As a matter of public policy, potential
respondents are protected from stale claims, claimants are obliged to be expeditious, and finality is promoted. Prescriptive time
limits may also be imposed by contract (as in many standard forms of contract—whether for the charter of a ship or for the
carrying out of a major civil engineering project). Limitation periods in litigation or arbitration must always be considered with
care as failure to observe them may be fatal in terms of the jurisdiction of the competent forum. Time usually starts to run
from the date on which the cause of action arises. In order to toll the limitation (that is, to ‘stop the clock’) in a dispute subject
to arbitration, it will be necessary to take a step to commence the arbitration, usually through the presentation to the relevant
institution (or to the opposing party in an ad hoc arbitration) of a request for arbitration. When considering compliance with
limitation periods, it is important that potential claimants take account of any steps that must be completed under the relevant
arbitration agreement before proceedings can be launched. For example, if there is an obligation in the agreement to engage
in amicable negotiations for thirty days, before commencing a claim which is itself subject to a three-year limitation period,
those negotiations must be commenced no later than two years and eleven months after the claim arose. This will ensure that
the Request for Arbitration can be served within the limitation period.
4. 07
There may be a difference in both the length and the nature of the time limits established by different national systems of
law. One system of law may classify limitation provisions as matters of procedure, to be governed by the law of the place of
arbitration, whilst another system may classify them as matters of substance, governed by the same law as that which governs
the other substantive matters in issue. In order to avoid any lack of predictability as to the relevant limitation period, many
countries have confirmed that limitation should be governed by the law applicable to the contract; and various countries have
passed laws to that effect. 7  However, such laws are not universal and the arbitral tribunal will have to determine the legal nature
and consequences of the time limits in each case.
(b) Commencement of an arbitration under institutional rules
4. 08
In order to stop time running, arbitration proceedings must be commenced in accordance with the arbitration agreement and
the relevant applicable law. If there is any difference between this law and any applicable institutional rules of arbitration, the
provisions of the applicable law will prevail, unless they are waivable. In most cases, however, national laws permit parties to
establish rules for commencement of arbitration by agreement, in which case the claimant need only comply with the relevant
institutional rules (or the rules set out in the arbitration clause itself).

Section B. - Commencement of an Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638625 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4. 09
By way of example, the ICC Rules require a party wishing to commence arbitration to submit a ‘Request for Arbitration’,
which must contain, inter alia, a description of the nature and circumstances of the dispute, a statement of the relief sought,
and any observations or proposals concerning the number of arbitrators and their nomination. 8  Article 4.2 of the ICC Rules
states that: ‘The date on which the Request is received by the Secretariat shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be the date of
the commencement of the arbitration.’ Similarly, the LCIA Rules treat the arbitration as having commenced on the date upon
which the Request (including all accompanying documents) is received electronically by the Registrar provided that the LCIA
has received the registration fee. 9
(c) Commencement of an ad hoc arbitration under the applicable law
4. 10
Where the arbitration is ad hoc and not subject to any specific rules (such as the UNCITRAL Rules or specific contractual
provisions), the law of the place of arbitration needs to be reviewed to establish how to comply with limitation periods. For
example, under English law, time will stop running if and when a request for arbitration is made in conformity with the relevant
arbitration clause. 10  Under Swiss law, in the absence of contrary agreement, proceedings are commenced ‘when a party initiates
the procedure for the constitution of the arbitral tribunal’. 11  In contrast, the Brazilian Arbitration Act 1996 provides that ‘[t]he
arbitration shall be deemed to be commenced when the appointment is accepted by the sole arbitrator or by all of the arbitrators
if there is more than one’. 12  The Model Law establishes that an arbitration is commenced when a respondent receives a request
for arbitration from the claimant. 13
Footnotes
7
See, e.g., the English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 13; Foreign Limitation Periods Act 1984, s. 1.
8
ICC Rules, Art. 4.
9
LCIA Rules, Art. 1.4.
10
The English Arbitration Act 1996 provides in art. 14(1) that: ‘The parties are free to agree when arbitral proceedings
are to be regarded as commenced for the purposes of this Part and for the purposes of the Limitation Acts.’
11
Swiss PIL, Ch. 12, s. 181. In England, the parties may agree upon when the proceedings are to be regarded as commenced
for limitation purposes. Failing agreement, it is when one party gives a written notice to the other party or the appointing
authority seeking the establishment of the tribunal, English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 14.
12
Brazilian Arbitration Act 1996, art. 19.
13
In this respect, Art. 21 of the Model Law provides that: ‘Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral proceedings
in respect of a particular dispute commence on the date on which a request for that dispute to be referred to arbitration
is received by the respondent.’
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
