Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses
A Practical Guide to Effective Dispute Resolution: Methods & Clauses 1st Ed.
Mainwork
Part 2 - Binding Dispute Resolution Methods and Clauses
Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses
Overview of litigation as a method of dispute resolution
7-001
Litigation has a long and varied history across the world as a method of resolving disputes through a court system and relying
on judges to make decisions. It can be traced back to ancient Mesopotamia, Egypt and Greece, which had established legal
systems that were designed to resolve disputes between citizens, but disputes were often still resolved through trial by ordeal
and the outcome was believed to be determined by divine intervention. As a side note, although last used to solve a dispute in
1597, the English law allowing “trial by battle” was not formally repealed until 1873. 1
As legal systems developed, the rule of law emerged, and legal procedures and principles were established with the court
process now considered by many as the default process of resolving disputes. The challenges of litigation as a method of dispute
resolution can be illustrated by reference to the differences between civil law and common law systems.
In common law systems (as found in many English-speaking countries including the UK, US, Canada, Australia and India),
litigation procedures are typically adversarial in nature with parties presenting their cases before a judge and the judge applying
the law to the facts, interpreting law and setting precedents. In contrast, in civil law systems the emphasis is on written laws
and codes, and judicial decisions are generally not binding as precedents. This approach typically leads to a more inquisitorial
style of litigation where judges actively investigate and gather evidence.
As well as the impact of different systems, there can be cultural and political influences affecting how litigation is perceived as a
means of dispute resolution. The US legal system is known for its adversarial nature, often magnified in Hollywood courtroom
dramas, whereas, by way of contrast, in Japan, litigation is typically seen as a last resort due to cultural values emphasising
harmony and avoiding conflict. This philosophy in Japan has historically tended to lead to a greater use of alternative dispute
resolution methods including negotiation and mediation. However, possibly as a result of the near-exponential growth of
international trade over the last 100 years, 2  in recent years there has been a shift towards litigation.
One thing that is clear is that, if there is no prior dispute resolution agreement or a clause in a contract specifying how parties
are to resolve a dispute, there is a high probability that one party or the other will file a claim in a court before considering
any other options.
Often, what is not acknowledged is that a decision to move straight to litigation may not always be the best option for the
parties. As shown elsewhere in this book, 3  other methods of dispute resolution, possibly in combination, may provide the most
effective way to resolve a dispute between the parties, especially if the parties are from different jurisdictions and/or trying to
preserve their business relationship.
The question of jurisdiction
7-002
One of the issues arising in litigation is the question of where to litigate (i.e. the forum). This is especially important if a dispute
between the parties is of an international nature, or the parties are coming from different jurisdictions. Although desirable, it
is not always easy to agree on a particular jurisdiction, even prior to the dispute arising. This is for the understandable reason

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
that parties may favour the jurisdiction they are most familiar with, the one in which they are based, or the one they have most
confidence in.
Where a dispute arises, each party may try to use an unresolved issue relating to jurisdiction to their advantage. This can include
disputing the jurisdiction of the court where the claim started and, if successful, disposing of the claim in this way. There is also
the phenomenon of “forum shopping”, where a party may pursue a claim in the jurisdiction most favourable to it, or even starting
parallel proceedings in a different jurisdiction. The latter is bound to bring extra costs, complications and, more importantly,
potentially different outcomes. This may be due to a number of reasons including, for example, the difference in the mandatory
laws of the forum, rules of evidence, certain issues being issues of procedure not substance, etc.
The questions of jurisdiction, where there is no agreement between the parties (either in the form of a jurisdiction clause in the
contract prior to the dispute or in the form of simple submission to jurisdiction by way of responding to pleadings or otherwise
not disputing jurisdiction), are often subject to satellite, and potentially costly, litigation between the parties.
Those questions tend to be complex and involve complicated provisions of national law and even private international law,
sometimes with unpredictable outcomes. One of the disadvantages of engaging in satellite litigation is that a lot of costs can be
wasted, and time lost if the court does not accept jurisdiction. The potential impact of a claimant losing time arguing points of
jurisdiction in one forum is dramatically magnified if, by the time the jurisdiction is declined, the limitation period for starting
proceedings in a more appropriate forum has expired.
All the above supports the view that care should be taken to avoid the potential issue of disputed jurisdiction whenever possible.
If litigation is the preferred method of resolving disputes, the drafters of the contract should consider including a jurisdiction
clause. As will be discussed below, even where a jurisdiction clause is included in a contract, there may still be other points
of dispute between the parties that can arise from an inadequately considered jurisdiction clause. Examples of such potential
points of dispute include the scope of the clause, its validity and enforceability.
It will nearly always be better—and easier—to deal with a disputed jurisdiction clause rather than to keep the option open for any
party to bring proceedings anywhere in the world. In the latter situation, a party could abuse its freedom to initiate proceedings
in another jurisdiction, for example, by selecting an obscure jurisdiction, where it is difficult to find lawyers or where that
jurisdiction does not necessarily provide the opportunity to litigate before an impartial judge/tribunal. A significant benefit of
including a jurisdiction clause in the contract is that it provides both parties with certainty as to where a claim will be heard.
A problem can also arise when the parties are coming from different jurisdictions and cannot agree on whether the jurisdiction
clause should favour one jurisdiction or the other. This can be a problem even prior to a dispute when the contract is being
drafted. Unless there is a possibility of concessions on other points of the contract, to avoid a deadlock, parties will quite often
agree to choose a neutral jurisdiction. This is easier if the choice or proposal is internationally recognised and is known to be
chosen regularly by other parties. Whilst such an international forum may not be the choice of both parties, agreeing to it, even
as a compromise, will be preferable to the risk of jurisdictional disputes arising at a later stage.
In addition to choosing which country’s courts are to have jurisdiction to hear disputes arising from the contract, parties should
consider whether they want court litigation to be the only method of dispute resolution available under the contract.
Effectiveness of litigation
7-003
Some of the characteristics of litigation that make it less effective as a dispute resolution method, especially on its own, are:
 
• formality of the court process;
 
• requirement to follow strict and potentially inflexible procedural rules;
 
• requirement to select lawyers having a licence to practise in front of the court of a particular jurisdiction (which is not
required to address an arbitral tribunal);
 
• restrictions on the availability of remedies, which may not always be suitable or effective enough to resolve a dispute if
the relationship between the parties is of a complex nature as well as complexities in what they want to achieve following

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
resolution of a dispute. In contrast to litigation, the range of remedies and outcomes available to parties is much wider if
a dispute is achieved through negotiation or mediation.
Moreover, the public and contentious nature of the litigation process and the focus on “winning the case” rather than resolving
the dispute, potentially exacerbated by lawyers, may further antagonise the relationship between the parties and damage it
beyond repair.
These considerations should be borne in mind when considering whether litigation is an appropriate method of dispute
resolution, especially if taken on its own, without considering mediation or negotiation prior to or during the litigation process.
Some of the issues with litigation described above could be addressed by opting for arbitration instead, which is less formal
and generally private and confidential. 4
Another point to bear in mind when deciding between arbitration and court litigation, is the ease with which a resulting judgment
can be enforced in other jurisdictions. Where the relevant assets are in a jurisdiction that is a party to the United Nations
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (1958) (“New York Convention”), arbitration
awards can be easier to enforce than a court judgment or order.
Whilst not universal, as of 2023, there were more than 170 countries that are parties or have agreed to be bound by the New York
Convention, albeit with some national derogations. Typical exceptions are jurisdictions such as North Korea where enforcement
of a court order arising from litigation would be equally challenging.
In considering a successful outcome of litigation, the claimant should look further into the enforcement process of the jurisdiction
or jurisdictions, where assets are located to ascertain if the procedure for enforcing judgments in those jurisdictions is similar or
comparable to the procedure that applies when enforcing arbitration awards (see the discussion on enforcement in para.7-008).
There are also other factors that could support a choice of litigation over arbitration, including the need for a more formal
process, the power of the court to make orders to bind or punish a potentially disruptive party and the need to resolve complex
legal issues, where having a binding precedent might be of assistance for the resolution of future disputes. Other advantages
and disadvantages of arbitration and litigation are discussed elsewhere in this book. 5
If it has been decided that litigation is the preferred method of dispute resolution, the contract drafters need to consider what
jurisdiction(s) they would like to choose, what type of jurisdiction clause they would like to include, and what its scope is
going to be.
How to choose jurisdiction in the most effective way?
7-004
It is important to bear in mind that the choice of jurisdiction and the choice of law are different matters and may not necessarily
coincide. Although it is advisable that they do coincide in order to avoid further complications and costs, the parties may choose
the law of a different country to govern their contract.
Generally, the law of the forum will determine issues of procedure, such as questions of evidence and enforcement. However,
questions relating to the merits or substance of a particular dispute, are generally determined by the governing law of the contract.
In terms of procedural law, one needs to consider civil versus common law approaches and any other legal traditions in regard to
procedure and evidence, which are substantively different and not dealt with in this book. It may be that the parties are coming
from one legal tradition or another and if both parties are more familiar with a particular legal tradition, the choice of jurisdiction
may need to reflect this. If they come from different legal traditions, there is the possibility to choose a more neutral jurisdiction
that both parties are familiar with either because of its internationally recognised nature or because of familiarity of the local
lawyers with this type of jurisdiction.
For example, English courts are well-known and widely used in international contracts as a neutral forum and the local lawyers
of various jurisdictions may have links to English lawyers or might be qualified to practise in England and Wales themselves. The
reputation of English judges for impartiality and their familiarity with international disputes and foreign parties are examples
of soft factors that may influence a preference for that jurisdiction over another.

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
The parties should also consider not only where they are domiciled (where they have a registered office, which may be a separate
matter for some), but also where they conduct business with each other, where their main witnesses might be, and the location
of their main offices where potential evidence may be held.
The language of the chosen jurisdiction is also important given that the presentation of evidence may have to be in that language.
If most of the anticipated evidence is going to be in a different language, the costs of translating it, hiring interpreters for
witnesses and lawyers that meet certain language requirements may be other factors to bear in mind. The witnesses may have
to travel from various locations and their availability and cost of travel could also be added as a further factor, as well as the
local courts’ recognition and facilitation of remote witness participation in the hearings.
Potential legal and litigation costs and the rules related to their allocation post-conclusion of the proceedings is something that
the parties may also want to consider. The cost of litigation varies substantially depending on the jurisdiction in which it is
conducted. The issue of who pays the costs of litigation also varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
As a guideline, it is typical in common law jurisdictions for the “loser pays” or “costs follow the event” principle to apply. In
contrast, in civil law jurisdictions, it is more common to find that each party bears their own costs—whether they win or lose. It
is therefore very important to consider various aspects of litigation in a particular jurisdiction before selecting that jurisdiction
in the jurisdiction clause.
Brexit-impact on the choice of English jurisdiction clauses
7-005
For the reasons stated above, English jurisdiction has often been chosen by parties as a neutral forum to resolve disputes.
However, Brexit may have put off some contract drafters from selecting courts of England and Wales in their dispute resolution
clauses. As such, it is worth considering how Brexit impacts on English jurisdiction clauses.
Although Brexit has substantially affected many areas of law (and dispute resolution is not an exception to that), it does not
mean that dispute resolution clauses involving English law or English jurisdiction would necessarily have a particular problem.
The Brexit effect has added additional uncertainty and potential points for further litigation, however, these are likely to be
preventable or avoidable in most circumstances.
Nevertheless, contract drafters have to bear in mind the changes brought on by Brexit when drafting or dealing with dispute
resolution clauses previously provided in contracts involving jurisdiction of courts in the UK. Previously, it was almost an
automatic exercise to prove that English courts had jurisdiction for enforcing an EU judgment in the UK, has become more
controversial and is now subject to potential arguments by parties.
Moreover, the complexity of applicable rules increased with the presence of the so-called transition period, which expired on 31
December 2020. Broadly speaking, if a matter falls under the transition period rules (by virtue of proceedings being instituted
on or before that date), the pre-Brexit rules will apply. If, however, proceedings were instituted after that date, the new rules will
apply. Given that there are fewer and fewer of the matters still governed by the old rules, the below discussion will focus mainly
on the new rules. They will also be the most relevant rules in relation to the drafting of dispute resolution clauses in contracts.
Brexit impact on jurisdiction of English courts
7-006
Pre-Brexit, and during the transition period, the question of jurisdictions between the UK and EU members were governed
by Regulation 1215/2012 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters
(recast) (Recast Brussels Regulation). 6  This regulation provides for a set of rules dealing with questions of jurisdiction in the
event of the presence or absence of jurisdiction clauses, as well as providing for rules applicable to certain specific contracts
(e.g. consumer, employment, insurance contracts). In effect, it requires the parties to respect the choice of jurisdiction in favour

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
of courts of a particular member state. It also requires the parties to treat jurisdiction clauses as exclusive, unless the parties
agreed otherwise. 7
One of the important features of the Recast Brussels Regulation is that it provides for the court having exclusive jurisdiction
under the jurisdiction agreement to deal with this matter first and for other courts seized (where a party brought a dispute to) to
stay proceedings unless the court having jurisdiction declines it. The practical effect is that a party cannot “play” the system and
frustrate the court process by bringing a claim in a jurisdiction other than the one under jurisdiction agreement for the purpose
of delaying the proceedings in the court of chosen jurisdiction until the court first seized declines its jurisdiction.
Unfortunately, this feature is not part of the Hague Convention on Choice of Court Agreements (2005) (Hague Convention
2005) and, therefore, was not “inherited” post-Brexit. After the transition period (from 1 January 2021), the Hague Convention
became the main instrument to deal with court jurisdiction, where there is an exclusive jurisdiction clause in favour of one of
the contracting parties (between the UK and the EU, as well as Mexico, Montenegro, Singapore and Ukraine).
Another notable effect of Brexit is that the UK is no longer part of the Convention on jurisdiction and the enforcement of
judgments in civil and commercial matters (2007) 8  (Lugano Convention) and, at the time of writing, it has not been able
to re-join. This convention governs jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments between the EU and Norway, Iceland and
Switzerland. Its effect is similar to the Brussels Regulation (2001), which precedes the Recast Brussels Regulation.
If a matter is to be considered by English courts, the fallback position is that the jurisdiction clause would be governed by either
English common law rules, or the Hague Convention 2005, only in respect of exclusive jurisdiction clauses and in relation to
certain countries, which are party to it, unless there is a separate bilateral or multi-lateral agreement between them. 9
In practical terms, for the purposes of drafting of jurisdiction clauses post-Brexit, one needs to bear in mind that if the jurisdiction
of the English courts is chosen, in order to benefit from the Hague Convention 2005 regime, the jurisdiction clause needs to be
exclusive. It should in principle protect the party benefiting from this clause from being sued in courts of another contracting
state of the Hague Convention 2005 (art.6). At the same time, the English courts would have to accept jurisdiction (art.5).
If, however, the jurisdiction clause is not exclusive, the Hague Convention 2005 would not apply and it will be up to the states
to accept or decline jurisdiction. Under English common law rules, it is likely that English courts would give force to such a
clause, but would also consider, whether England would be an appropriate forum to bring proceedings. This may also lead to
further arguments and satellite litigation.
Location of assets and their availability for enforcement when choosing
jurisdiction
7-007
When considering the jurisdiction of which courts to include in the dispute resolution clause, one of the most important factors
to bear in mind is the location of the party’s relevant assets, against which one party (the winning one) may have to enforce a
resulting judgment. This gives rise to a different perspective on the place of business considerations, as parties may be registered
in one jurisdiction, have the main operations/business in another jurisdiction, but the relevant major assets could be located in
a completely different jurisdiction.
Choosing a jurisdiction by reference to the location of assets may not be the most preferable option given that other factors,
including the ones stated above, collectively or separately may indicate a different choice of jurisdiction. Nevertheless, drafters
still need to consider how easy it is going to be to enforce the judgment of a court of one jurisdiction in another jurisdiction
where the assets are located.
Another factor to assess is the availability and enforceability of interim and final remedies in the chosen jurisdiction, whether
linked to enforcement or not. Remedies such as worldwide freezing orders, disclosure orders, etc. and their potential recognition
in the place where assets are located could also be one of the tools that could be helpful to a party to conduct litigation and
enforce a judgment against assets.

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
These factors are highly specific to the parties and their relationship. This means that they may be more relevant in relation
to some companies than others. For example, the risks relating to enforcement are likely to be less when dealing with well-
established companies from particular jurisdictions, where transparency of asset ownership and mechanisms of enforcement
against them are well established, than in other cases where parties may anticipate some potential difficulties with enforcement
or location of assets.
The availability and location of assets for the purpose of enforcement is one of the first questions that is considered by litigation
lawyers who are contemplating starting (especially particularly costly) legal proceedings in court against foreign prospective
defendants. This is because the time and costs incurred in litigation and obtaining any related judgment may be wasted, unless
the remedy ordered by the judge can be enforced against assets of the losing party in another jurisdiction.
Given these considerations (which are not always recognised by non-litigators or those who do not deal with international
disputes), when choosing the courts of a particular jurisdiction, it is important for the contract drafters to consider any future
issues with enforcement against assets of the counterparty. If the latter proves to be problematic, especially in litigation, it may
be worthwhile revising the question of whether to choose litigation or incorporate an arbitration clause instead, as arbitration
awards may be easier to enforce due to their international nature and the wide membership of many countries to the New York
Convention.
Enforcement considerations when selecting litigation for effective dispute
resolution
7-008
Unlike with arbitration awards, enforcement of court judgments internationally is confined to a number of not so universal
multilateral treaties, bilateral agreements and national laws and procedural rules, which are (with some small exceptions)
different in each country.
The Recast Brussels Regulation is probably unique in a sense that it removes many barriers for the enforcement of court
judgments between the EU Member States and makes the enforcement very straightforward. However, as discussed in
para.7-006, since Brexit, the UK is no longer a beneficiary of the EU regime.
Unless a chosen jurisdiction is an EU Member State, contract drafters, when including litigation in a particular jurisdiction,
should consider the question of recognition and enforcement of judgments, where the assets of the counterparty are located in
a different jurisdiction to the one where a judgment would be issued.
For example, it may be easier to enforce an English court judgment in other common law jurisdictions, which are more familiar
with the English legal system, than in some civil law countries, especially if they do not have a mechanism for the easy or
direct enforcement of judgments from foreign countries. Alternatively, some jurisdictions may be more suspicious regarding
foreign judgments or judgments coming from particular jurisdictions. These interactions between the jurisdictions with respect
to enforcement is another major factor to bear in mind.
Some countries may rely on the existence of reciprocal relationships between the country of the judgment and the country of
enforcement. If there is a common bilateral or multilateral treaty that exists between these countries, this would point towards a
more straightforward approach of recognition and enforcement. If, however, the parties would be forced to rely on the national
rules, this may make the enforcement process difficult or, in some cases, even impossible.
Either way, it is important to consider the national procedure for enforcement and whether it is simplified by the existence of a
particular treaty between the countries, or whether it is cumbersome and potentially expensive.
If there is a possibility to avoid this cumbersome process by drafting a dispute resolution clause in such a way that the matter
falls under a more simplified procedure or under a bilateral or multilateral treaty between the states, it is better to pre-empt such
an issue from the start, at the time of the contract drafting.
An example of the above situation is where a dispute resolution clause is exclusive and a state for potential enforcement of a
judgment issued in the UK is party to the Hague Convention 2005. This contains a more straightforward process for enforcement

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
than common law rules, requiring issuing a claim on a judgment in order to enforce it from the states, which are not party to
the Hague Convention 2005 or any other bilateral or multilateral arrangements between the UK and the other country.
If the contract drafters decide to include a non-exclusive clause or if they choose a jurisdiction which is not part of the Hague
Convention 2005, this may “disqualify” the future judgment from a more straightforward enforcement process under the Hague
Convention 2005 rules and require it to follow common law procedure. The benefits of drafting a non-exclusive dispute
resolution clause and/or selecting a particular jurisdiction may need to be considered against the benefits of the simplified
procedure provided in the Hague Convention 2005.
In addition to the existence of the treaties between the countries, another issue to consider is the grounds for refusing to recognise
or enforce a judgment and whether the drafters could address any potential arguments by well-drafted dispute resolution clause.
One of the issues to consider is the jurisdiction of the court issuing a judgment. It is often territorial (meaning the location of the
defendant) or consensual (the defendant submitted to a particular jurisdiction). The latter point in the Hague Convention 2005 is
represented by the requirement to have agreed an exclusive jurisdiction clause in favour of the courts of that jurisdiction. Given
that agreeing an exclusive jurisdiction clause in advance would probably be the least problematic way to prove the jurisdiction
of the court in question, it is probably better to do that, if any enforcement issues or arguments are anticipated.
Another requirement is for the notice to the defendant of the proceedings. This question is related to the question of service of
the proceedings. A notice or service provision, specifying the way in which the proceedings should be served, can deal with this
issue. It is also essential to check with the local law as to the local requirements for the proceedings to be considered as served.
Other grounds for refusal to recognise or enforce a foreign judgment could include allegations that the judgment is obtained by
fraud or that it would be against public policy (see, for example, art.9(d) and (e) of the Hague Convention 2005). Whilst these
arguments are likely to depend on how the proceedings are conducted and cannot be anticipated in advance, if judgments of
courts of a particular jurisdiction, where the judgment may need to be enforced in the future, are regularly challenged on grounds
of fraud or public policy breaches in another jurisdiction, it may be better to avoid using that jurisdiction in the jurisdiction
clause.
Further arguments against enforcement of a foreign judgment could be related to an inconsistency with an earlier judgment
between the same parties on the same cause of action (see, for instance, art.9 (g) of the Hague Convention 2005). In order to
reduce the risk of parallel proceedings and inconsistent judgment, an exclusive jurisdiction clause may help to resolve later
arguments regarding jurisdiction and which judgment should have prevalence.
However, this situation may always be avoided, given that other courts may accept jurisdiction on different grounds irrespective
of the existence of a dispute resolution clause and it would be for the courts of the state of enforcement to decide whether they
will accept an earlier judgment of the court of another jurisdiction or refuse to recognise/enforce it due to the lack of jurisdiction
of that court.
The situation with the enforcement of foreign judgments may soon become easier in the countries, among which the Convention
on the recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments in civil or commercial matters (2019) (Hague Convention 2019) will
enter into force. On 12 January 2024 the UK signed the Hague Convention 2019 and deposited its instrument of ratification on 27
June 2024. This means that the Convention will come into force on 1 July 2025. This could resolve some issues of enforcement
of judgments in and of the EU Member States post-Brexit given that the EU (except Denmark) is also party to this Convention.
The Hague Convention 2019 deals with many more grounds for recognition and enforcement of judgments than the Hague
Convention 2005, which is only concerned with exclusive jurisdiction clauses. Instead of focusing on the exclusive jurisdiction
agreements as a basis for the judgment issued in the state of origin, it provides for various bases for recognition and enforcement.
These include habitual residence of the defendant; principal place of business; express consent to the jurisdiction or argued on
merits in court of origin; place of performance of a contractual obligation and even for some non-contractual obligations (see
art.5 of the Hague Convention 2019 for the full list). It allows recognition of judgments in cases where there is a non-exclusive
or asymmetric jurisdiction clause (art.5(1)(m) of the Hague Convention 2019).
The basis provided under the Hague Convention 2019 are for the enforcing state to assess, rather than to embark on the question
of whether the state, which issued the judgment, had jurisdiction in the first place. In a sense, it may be easier to argue that the
matter, or the person subject to the judgment, fall within one of those grounds, rather than be limited by very narrow principles
of territorial or consensual jurisdiction. This Convention is also in addition to the narrower in scope Hague Convention 2005,
dealing only with exclusive jurisdiction clauses.

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
In terms of its relevance for drafting purposes, the Hague Convention 2019 would substantially extend the possibility for English
courts to be chosen as elected jurisdiction, even in non-exclusive or asymmetric jurisdiction clauses once this Hague Convention
enters into force for the UK. This would only, however, apply in relation to the parties to the Hague Convention 2019 and
subject to any declarations made by another state party.
Given that both Hague Conventions have different members as their Member States, it is important to check the status for each
state before considering which jurisdiction to select and where a judgment from that jurisdiction may be enforced.
Brexit-impact on enforcement of judgments
7-009
The impact of Brexit on the enforcement of English court judgments in EU Member States is probably the most significant
change. This is because the enforcement of judgments between the EU Member States is largely streamlined and simplified by
virtue of application of the Recast Brussels Regulation. Without it being applicable, the enforcement of English judgments in
EU Member States and vice versa (judgments of EU Member States in the UK) has to rely on the national laws of those states.
The pre-Brexit regime under the Recast Brussels Regulation (which continues to apply to the recognition and enforcement
of judgments given in the proceedings instituted before the end of the transition period) provided for a simplified process of
recognition and enforcement of judgments of one Member State in another EU Member State. This removed the procedural
barriers for recognition and enforcement of judgments between Member States and made it a relatively straightforward process.
The Recast Brussels Regulation recognised that, during this process, the substance of the judgment made in one Member State is
not going to be reviewed in the courts of another Member State (art.52); that it will be recognised without any special procedure
being required (art.36), and without any declaration of enforceability being required (art.36). It also provided that recognition
could be refused only on the basis of very limited grounds (art.45(1)) and that the jurisdiction of the court of origin may not be
reviewed (art.45(3)), save for special contracts and exclusive jurisdiction clauses, where jurisdiction is essentially prescribed.
Post-Brexit judgments (where the proceedings, which led to the judgment, have been issued after the expiry of the transition
period on 31 December 2020) do not provide the same benefits between the UK and EU Member States anymore.
The judgments that fall under the provisions of the Hague Convention 2005 (where there is an exclusive jurisdiction clause)
(art.8(1)) can still benefit from a simplified procedure for recognition and enforcements in the state parties of the Hague
Convention 2005. Their recognition or enforcement can be refused only on the basis of limited grounds. 10  The list is similar to
the Recast Brussels Regulation but adapted to the requirements to establish a valid exclusive jurisdiction clause (see in particular
art.9 (a) and (b)). 11  The Hague Convention 2005 also sets out what documents need to be produced for the judgment to be
recognised or enforced (art.13).
Overall, the Hague Convention 2005 provides a reasonable route for a party to recognise and enforce a judgment obtained in the
UK in the contracting state of the Convention post-Brexit, where the Recast Brussels Regulation no longer applies. It must be
remembered, however, that this only would apply where the proceedings were based on the valid exclusive jurisdiction clause.
The rest of the cases, which were covered by the Recast Brussels Regulation before, would fall under the national rules of the
UK and the EU Member States, unless separate bilateral agreements exist between them. In the case of the UK these would
be common law rules.
If there is a non-exclusive jurisdiction clause or there is no jurisdiction clause (or it is defective for one reason or an other),
the parties would have to consider the law of each state they would like the judgment to be enforced. Advice from lawyers in
those states would have to be obtained. One of the problems of following these rules is that it may be a lengthy, complicated
and costly process and could be different in each of the states the judgment is to be enforced.
This issue can be illustrated by the example of an enforcement of a judgment in English courts, obtained in an EU Member State.
In the absence of any other applicable treaty regime, a party intending to recognise and enforce a foreign judgment under English
common law rules would have to start separate proceedings on a judgment. These proceedings may be dealt with summarily
by way of a summary judgment application. However, this is not as simple as it would be under the Recast Brussels Regulation
and may result in a more protracted set of proceedings if the judgment debtor puts forward any defences.

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
One of the possible defences is the question of jurisdiction of the court which issued the judgment. Unlike under the Recast
Brussels Regulation, where the jurisdiction of the court which issued the judgment (the court of origin) is recognised and cannot
be reviewed subject to only very specific exceptions (see art.45(3) of the Recast Brussels Regulation and above), under common
law rules, English courts would have to consider whether the court of origin had jurisdiction under English private international
law rules. 12
This means that a foreign court would have jurisdiction for enforcement purposes, if the person against whom it was given
was present in the country where and when the proceedings were instituted; claimed or counterclaimed in the proceedings;
otherwise submitted to the jurisdiction of the court by voluntarily appearing in the proceedings; or had agreed to submit to
the jurisdiction of the court. 13  This is different from the Recast Brussels Regulation, which allows other ways to establish
jurisdiction for the court of origin. 14
This discrepancy may lead a defending party/judgment debtor to argue that the court of origin did not have jurisdiction under
English law and, therefore, the English court should not recognise the foreign judgment. If they are successful in their challenge,
the claimant/judgment creditor may find itself unable to enforce the judgment obtained in another Member State, which may
result in the judgment not being satisfied at all (if the assets are located only in the UK). In practice, it is unlikely that this would
happen just on this basis, but it is still probable that the situation is likely to lead to protracted legal arguments, proceedings
and further/extensive costs. Similar situations could happen when a party tries to enforce an English court judgment in an EU
Member State.
Therefore, in order to avoid this kind of situation, the best thing is to draft an exclusive jurisdiction clause in the first instance.
This could be a jurisdiction clause in favour of another state or English court. For the avoidance of any complications, if it
is contemplated that the enforcement is going to happen in the UK, an English jurisdiction clause and English governing law
would avoid further arguments in this regard.
Types of jurisdiction clauses
7-010
Another major factor to consider is the enforceability versus the flexibility of the jurisdiction clause itself, which is also
dependent on the type of clause used. This is not just for the purposes of the application of the Hague Convention 2005. The
approach of different jurisdictions to the various types of jurisdiction clauses may also differ. There are a number of different
types of jurisdiction clauses: exclusive and non-exclusive, as well as asymmetric, or unilateral, jurisdiction clauses.
Exclusive jurisdiction clauses
7-011
Exclusive jurisdiction clauses appear less problematic but provide the least flexibility. They designate a particular jurisdiction as
exclusive for both parties and effectively prohibit parties from bringing proceedings in any other jurisdictions unless by mutual
consent. Whilst not granting any flexibility to the parties, they are more often enforced in different domestic courts and provide
some certainty as to the place where parties are allowed to sue their counterparty. They obviously do not guarantee that a party
may not start proceedings elsewhere, but, if the clause is breached, the innocent party may apply for an anti-suit injunction or
claim a breach of contract or any other remedies available to make the other party comply with the exclusive jurisdiction clause.
Courts that do not have express jurisdiction are more likely to decline it and the courts that do have jurisdiction, by virtue of
the clause, are more likely to uphold it. Moreover, exclusive jurisdiction clauses that fall within the Hague Convention 2005
should be upheld in the relevant Contracting States.
However, even with an exclusive jurisdiction clause, there may be situations where the courts where proceedings are commenced
decide to disregard it. Some domestic law provisions in relation to certain types of potential litigants (who are perceived to be
“weaker” parties), such as employees in employment contracts or consumers in consumer contracts, may allow those parties

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
to sue the other side in their place of domicile. There may be other reasons, such as policy reasons or because of a particular
connection with another jurisdiction, as to why the courts could decide to decline jurisdiction in contravention of an exclusive
jurisdiction clause. That is why it is important to carry out due diligence on the jurisdiction of choice, even where the clause
provides that jurisdiction is exclusive, in order to assess whether the courts of that jurisdiction will be inclined to enforce an
exclusive jurisdiction clause.
At the same time, it cannot be guaranteed that the other side will not try to start proceedings in another jurisdiction, which
might accept the dispute. The possibility of parallel proceedings cannot be eliminated. However, there may be other options
available to the innocent party to deal with such a problem. The innocent party may sue for damages for breach of the jurisdiction
clause under the contract and, in addition, pursue any other remedies for breach that are made available to it under the contract
(provided such remedies are available in the chosen jurisdiction).
Non-exclusive jurisdiction clauses
7-012
In relation to non-exclusive jurisdiction clauses, their enforceability is more difficult to predict. Non-exclusive jurisdiction
clauses provide for the parties either to bring proceedings in the courts of the chosen jurisdiction or in the courts of any other
country that may have jurisdiction over the dispute.
Such clauses provide flexibility for the parties in their chosen jurisdiction, but remove the certainty provided by exclusive
jurisdiction clauses. The problem is that not all jurisdictions will enforce such clauses and therefore their utility could be
doubtful. The Hague Convention 2005 also only applies to exclusive jurisdiction clauses and therefore parties with non-
exclusive jurisdiction clauses in their contract are not going to benefit from the enforcement regime provided under the
Convention. 15
If the wording of the jurisdiction clause is not clear enough as to whether it is exclusive or non-exclusive, the courts may interpret
it either way depending on the precise wording and the factual matrix. 16  This creates further uncertainty as to how the judges
will proceed in different jurisdictions. In order to avoid unnecessary satellite litigation, the wording should be unambiguous as
to whether parties meant the jurisdiction clause to be exclusive or non-exclusive.
Asymmetric jurisdiction clauses
7-013
Another type of jurisdiction clause that may cause some uncertainty as to its enforcement in certain jurisdictions is an asymmetric
or unilateral jurisdiction clause. Such a clause allows one party to sue the other party in the courts of any competent jurisdiction,
whereas the other party can only sue in the named jurisdiction.
This is a one-sided clause because it provides the party which is allowed to choose jurisdiction more flexibility as to which
forum they want to sue the counterparty in. At the same time, such a clause restricts the other party (which could be a weaker
party in this relationship) to a pre-determined choice of jurisdiction under the contract. In this sense, the “stronger” party may
have the best of both worlds: the flexibility of being able to choose a jurisdiction, and more certainty that they are not going to
be sued in some other jurisdiction, apart from the one indicated in the contract.
The circumstances where such clauses tend to appear include when there is a clear power imbalance with a much larger or more
powerful company effectively demanding those terms from smaller, weaker, entities. This can happen when the party with the
ability to choose is a lender and may want the option to sue where assets are located in multiple jurisdictions. Such a clause may
also be agreed when a party does not have representation or has a limited understanding of the implications of such a clause or
when they are under time pressure to close a deal and have no choice but to accept asymmetric terms.
However, in these circumstances, “certainty” is relative. Asymmetric jurisdiction clauses are not always considered valid and
enforceable in some jurisdictions and, therefore, the “perceived” benefit may end up being a detriment, as the “weaker” party

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
may try to sue in a jurisdiction where such a clause will not be upheld. It is therefore important to consider when drafting such
a clause whether the courts of other competent jurisdictions could be used by the other side to bypass the requirements of the
clause or whether it will be enforced in those jurisdictions. 17
The wording and scope of a jurisdiction clause
7-014
Another issue is that the wording of the jurisdiction clause itself, irrespective of its type, may be challenged. If the wording
of the jurisdiction clause is not sufficiently certain or clear in relation to its scope and application, it could become the subject
of satellite litigation. In turn, this would prolong the resolution of the dispute and cause the parties to incur further costs. It is
therefore important that the jurisdiction clause is clear and unambiguous. It is also important to check the requirements of the
jurisdiction it refers to, as well as the governing law of the contract, to see whether there are any specific mandatory requirements
as to how the clause should be drafted.
As to the scope of the jurisdiction clause, it is important to consider whether to make it broad enough to cover all possible
disputes between the parties or whether to limit its application only to certain disputes and provide for another jurisdiction
clause or even another dispute resolution clause for other types of disputes. Although drafters may have commercial or other
reasons for doing the latter, it could cause more arguments between the parties in the future and later lead to parallel proceedings
and conflicting judgments or awards.
This is because where there are multiple dispute resolution provisions in a contract, there is more scope for an argument in
relation to their interpretation and application at the time of a dispute as a party could subsequently rely on them to either issue
proceedings in a different jurisdiction or argue that a different form of dispute resolution applies (if this is provided in relation
to other disputes between the same parties).
Jurisdiction clauses in related contracts
7-015
The same is true in relation to jurisdiction clauses in related contracts. The choice of conflicting jurisdictions and/or the inclusion
of different dispute resolution clauses in related contracts may lead to further satellite litigation. Arguments may be advanced
in relation to the scope of each dispute resolution clause and its interpretation in different jurisdictions.
This could lead to parallel proceedings, when each party starts proceedings in a jurisdiction of a related contract in relation to
disputes involving essentially the same set of facts. This could also raise questions of enforceability of the resulting judgments
in each jurisdiction and the jurisdiction of the court seized of each set of proceedings. Jurisdictional issues could be raised even
at the enforcement stage. A lot of cost and time will be wasted if such arguments are successful at the enforcement stage and
as a result, the enforcement of the judgment fails.
Drafters, therefore, should consider whether there are any compelling reasons why two different jurisdiction clauses should
appear in related contracts and may need to try to avoid any possible ambiguity as to the wording. They also need to cover the
situations where a potential counterclaim could arise which links two contracts together. In addition, they need to deal with the
risk of uncertainty in relation to whether the counterclaim could be heard in the same jurisdiction as the main proceedings or
whether it is a separate claim to be heard in a different jurisdiction in accordance with the dispute resolution provision in the
related contract. This may need to be specified in both the contracts. However, this still may not resolve all the issues given
that each jurisdiction may have its own procedural rules as to how to deal with counterclaims and may give different weight
to what the wording of the contract provides in relation to them.
It may well be that the considerations behind including two or more different jurisdiction clauses in related contracts are
outweighed by the risks of satellite litigation and parallel proceedings. These considerations should be examined carefully, as
the risks of parallel proceedings and further satellite litigation could be prevented by including identical jurisdiction clauses
in the related contracts.

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
Clauses and commentary
7-016
As discussed above, a clear and unambiguous jurisdiction clause is preferred from the point of view of avoiding potential
arguments, satellite litigation and increased costs in a potential dispute. Moreover, exclusive jurisdiction clauses are more
often upheld across various jurisdictions than non-exclusive jurisdiction clauses. With that in mind drafters should consider
the following wording:
“Each party irrevocably agrees that the courts of […] shall have…”.
This is simple wording for a jurisdiction clause for the benefit of both parties. Considering the factors discussed in para.7-004,
drafters should include which country’s courts are to have jurisdiction.
Exclusivity
7-017
“…exclusive / non-exclusive jurisdiction…”.
Drafters should consider whether they wish the jurisdiction to be exclusive or non-exclusive. As discussed in para.7-012,
although some jurisdictions may read into the wording of the clause to ascertain whether the parties meant it to be exclusive or
non-exclusive, in order to avoid further escalation of litigation and costs, it is preferable to specify it directly in the clause.
“…to settle any dispute or claim (including non-contractual disputes or claims) arising out of or in connection
with this agreement or its subject matter or formation”.
This jurisdiction clause might be drafted widely so that it covers various disputes relating to the contract. It also includes non-
contractual disputes/claims, such as tortious liability. The advantage of this would be to avoid further parallel proceedings
between the parties in another jurisdiction based on the same factual matrix but engaging different causes of action. As the same
facts could give rise to contractual and non-contractual claims, it is preferable to resolve them in one jurisdiction especially if
there is a possibility of potential counterclaims. The same wording could also be included in any related contract to avoid any
contradictions between them and multiple proceedings.
Asymmetric jurisdiction clauses
7-018
If an exclusive or non-exclusive jurisdiction clause is included, as we can see from the wording above, the parties are essentially
in parity with each other in relation to their rights and obligations to bring proceedings in a certain jurisdiction, selected by
both. If there is still a need to give one party the flexibility to choose a different jurisdiction after the dispute arises, but at the
same time to bind the other party to a particular jurisdiction, an asymmetric clause can be chosen. However, depending on the

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
chosen jurisdiction, this may not necessarily be upheld in every single jurisdiction and the parties run a risk of such a clause
being unenforceable.
If drafters decide to proceed with this option, the following wording could be considered:
“Each party irrevocably agrees, for the sole benefit of [Party A] that, subject as provided below, the courts
of […] shall have exclusive jurisdiction…”.
The addition of “for the sole benefit of Party A” is added to contrast the rights and obligations of the parties in this asymmetric
clause with the symmetric one, where both parties are in parity. It becomes clear from the start of the wording that as the
exclusive jurisdiction clause is for the benefit of only one party, the other one cannot rely on it against the benefiting party
(Party A) in order to claim any remedies, if the benefiting party starts proceedings elsewhere. It is also to indicate that the other
party—Party B—cannot start proceedings elsewhere but only exclusively in the chosen jurisdiction.
“…over any dispute or claim (including non-contractual disputes or claims) arising out of or in connection
with this agreement or its subject matter or formation…”.
As above, the clause could include wording that is broad enough to encompass both contractual and non-contractual claims
between the parties, as well as other connected disputes/claims.
“Nothing in this clause shall limit the right of [Party A] to take proceedings against [Party B] in any other
court of competent jurisdiction…”.
The clause expressly gives Party A the right to bring proceedings in other jurisdictions, but the same right is not given to Party B.
“…nor shall the taking of proceedings in any one or more jurisdictions preclude the taking of proceedings
in any other jurisdictions, whether concurrently or not, to the extent permitted by the law of such other
jurisdiction”.
The clause may also make clear that if Party B is to start proceedings first, this would not preclude Party A from commencing
proceedings elsewhere, whether parallel or not. This may not be the most efficient and cost-effective way to deal with a dispute.
However, in this case at least Party A reserved the right to do that, in case Party B commences the proceedings first in an attempt
to exclude Party A starting proceedings in other jurisdictions. In this way, Party A is free to commence proceedings where it
wants to and when it wants to, subject obviously to this being permitted in the jurisdiction chosen by Party A.
If there is a good reason (agreed by both parties) as to why an asymmetric jurisdiction clause is necessary, it can help to record
this in the agreement.
Other options regarding the choice of jurisdiction
7-019
Another option is to split jurisdictions between the parties. This would be a more balanced option when the parties cannot agree
on one jurisdiction. The wording of such a clause could be as follows:

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
“Each party irrevocably agrees that any proceedings relating to any dispute or claim (including non-
contractual disputes or claims) arising out of or in connection with this agreement or its subject matter or
formation instituted against [Party A] by [Party B] shall be brought in the courts of [Party A’s country] and
any such proceedings against [Party B] by [Party A] shall be brought in the courts of [Party B’s country].”
To deal with the question of counterclaims, the following wording could be added:
“Each party agrees that the specified courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction over such disputes or claims
save that any counterclaim may be brought in any proceedings already commenced.”
Although the wording of such clauses is somewhat cumbersome, it alleviates a deadlock, which parties could find themselves
in, if they disagree on the choice of exclusive jurisdiction. In this way, the parity of the parties is preserved, at the same time,
each of the parties gets an equal opportunity to choose its own/known jurisdiction.
Service of proceedings clauses
7-020
Another potential issue that the parties need to be aware of when drafting jurisdiction clauses is how the service of proceedings
will be effected on the counterparty, in the event of the dispute.
A full review of the topic of service of legal proceedings, and the rules related to it, is beyond the scope of this book, as it would
be governed by the laws of a particular jurisdiction (for example, by the Civil Procedure Rules (CPR) in England and Wales)
and these are very specific. Nevertheless, drafters could still consider including some clauses related to service in the contract.
This could help to avoid further litigation related to whether the proceedings were served correctly.
One should bear in mind that there is a distinction between notice provisions in a contract (commonly used for giving notices
to the parties) and provisions dealing expressly with service of legal proceedings. The latter can be useful especially where one
or more of the parties is in a jurisdiction, where service of proceedings may be time consuming and uncertain.
The effectiveness of service of legal proceedings clauses depends on: (i) the governing law of the contract; (ii) the law of the
jurisdiction chosen for the resolution of disputes; (iii) the law of the jurisdiction of the proposed defendant; and (iv) the law of
the place where any judgment or award may need to be served. Therefore, contract drafters may need to look into these laws
to obtain local advice regarding the service of legal proceedings.
Other types of clauses may provide that service may be effected by a chosen method, e.g. electronically. Care is needed to
ensure that “contractual service” is permitted under the relevant jurisdictions.
One of the possible clauses that could be linked to service is the inclusion of service on agents for service of process of a party,
in particular, if those agents are located within the jurisdiction which is chosen by the parties for the court proceedings to be
issued in. For example, in cross-border finance agreements governed by English law, it is common for the lender to require
the borrower to appoint an agent for service of process, which enables proceedings to be served on the borrower by service
on an agent in England.
This is important because the service of court proceedings on an agent within jurisdiction would be much simpler to enact than
on the party outside that jurisdiction. Not only may the court’s permission be required to serve a party outside jurisdiction, the
process of service out of jurisdiction tends to be much more complex, requires more time, and may involve other agencies,
state organs or institutions, including enforcement agencies, foreign courts and process servers. Agreeing to authorise agents to
accept service in advance could avoid dealing with various agencies in a foreign jurisdiction. Such agents could be a law firm
retained by the relevant party or a company offering such a service.

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
There is a possibility that one of the parties decides to take advantage from being outside jurisdiction, which is less accessible to
being served with the proceedings. This could lead to the escalation of costs and time, as well as the dispute itself being delayed
at the procedural stage and may not benefit them long-term. One of the reasons for this is that those costs in the event of losing
could also end up being borne by the obstructing party. Even if the party is not motivated to obstruct the process, it may still be
costly and time consuming to comply with particular methods of service permitted in its jurisdiction.
Moreover, if there are no proper systems in place to receive court correspondence, having no agent within jurisdiction may also
put a party in a disadvantaged position, because it may simply miss important documents, which are properly served or deemed
served in fact by delivering or posting them, depending on the rules of service in a particular jurisdiction. Therefore, ensuring
that they have an approved agent, able to accept service in the jurisdiction chosen by parties, may be a better way to deal with
the uncertainties of the situation that starting proceedings may entail.
Service on an agent
7-021
A clause for allowing service on agents of the party could read as follows:
“[Party A] irrevocably appoints [Name and address of the agent] as its agent to receive on its behalf in
[Jurisdiction] service of any proceedings under [Jurisdiction clause] above. Such service shall be deemed
completed on delivery to such agent (whether or not it is forwarded to and received by [Party A]) and shall be
valid until such time as [Party B] has received prior written notice that such agent has ceased to act as agent.
If for any reason such agent ceases to be able to act as agent or no longer has an address in [Jurisdiction],
[Party A] shall forthwith appoint a substitute acceptable to [Party B] and deliver to [Party B] the new agent’s
name and address within [Jurisdiction].”
[Party A] irrevocably appoints [Name and address of the agent] as its agent to receive on its behalf in
[Jurisdiction] service of any proceedings under [Jurisdiction clause] above…”.
It is important to indicate the name and address (and if service is to be by other means, any other contact details) of the agent,
so that they could be served with the proceedings in accordance with the provisions related to service. Whilst those provisions
could be of a contractual nature (see para.7-024), those provisions could, and probably by default would, derive from the civil
procedure rules of service of proceedings applicable in a particular jurisdiction.
By specifying the agent within the jurisdiction, a party cannot then argue that it was supposed to receive the proceedings instead
of, or in addition to, the agent (unless this agent has to be changed because it stopped acting as an agent).
“…Such service shall be deemed completed on delivery to such agent (whether or not it is forwarded to and
received by [Party A]) and shall be valid until such time as [Party B] has received prior written notice that
such agent has ceased to act as agent…”.
This part clarifies the points made above: irrespective of whether the party itself receives the service of proceedings, if they are
delivered to the agent, this should be sufficient, unless there has been prior written notice that the agent has ceased to act as agent.

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
“…If for any reason such agent ceases to be able to act as agent or no longer has an address in [Jurisdiction],
[Party A] shall forthwith appoint a substitute acceptable to [Party B] and deliver to [Party B] the new agent’s
name and address within [Jurisdiction]”.
This part of the clause makes it clear that the responsibility is on the appointing party to make sure that its agent accepts the
service of the proceedings. In the event of any issues, it is for the relevant party to provide a substitute for the agent within
jurisdiction and inform the other party about it. It effectively requires the party to accept the service through its agent and within
jurisdiction, rather than allowing the party to use this opportunity not to accept service within jurisdiction. Under such wording,
this does not become possible without re-negotiating this part of the agreement.
Methods of service
7-022
Another question linked to the service of the proceedings is which methods can or should be used to serve. Whilst the methods
themselves are normally prescribed by the rules of service of a chosen jurisdiction, it is also possible to provide for the methods
of service in the contract itself. This could be done by including a clause in the contract that provides for the proceedings to
be served in accordance with the same methods as the service of the notices. This provision is often included in the contract.
The contract drafters, however, need to check with the local lawyers as to whether such methods are permitted to serve the
legal proceedings.
The notices provision would normally specify how notices to each of the parties should be served, for example, by post and/
or by email, personally or otherwise; when they are deemed to be served (when delivered or sent); and where they are to be
served, for example, at a particular address, on a particular individual or staff member.
From one side, agreeing the methods of service of the proceedings between the parties in advance of a dispute arising may help
to tailor the approach to the parties’ needs and avoid overcomplicated and formal requirements of the rules of the jurisdiction
chosen by the parties. Methods of services by a prior agreement may also provide better clarity than formal rules as to how
parties will serve proceedings and also whether some of the methods are not convenient, out of date (i.e. not allowing email
service) or simply unreliable. A “service of proceedings” provision could deal with this by choosing or excluding different
methods or adding further alternative methods of service.
Potential pitfalls of service clause
7-023
Offsetting the benefits as set out in para.7-020, there may also be a number of pitfalls of using a special service proceedings
clause, in particular, it is possible that such a clause may cause further points for litigation, challenge and costs consequences.
Any such service provision must be very precise and contain no ambiguity as to the wording and intentions of the parties. It
needs to specify whether the methods of service provided in the contract will be exclusive or in addition to the methods of
service prescribed by law of the jurisdiction chosen by the parties. Any residual ambiguity in the wording could provide scope
to a defending party to argue that the methods were not prescribed properly under the contract, or the methods provided in the
contract did not substitute the methods prescribed by law.
The problem is that the jurisdiction chosen by the parties may not allow significant deviation from the methods of service
prescribed by law, irrespective of parties’ choices under the contract. This could be as a result of procedural law only allowing
certain methods of service of the proceedings or not allowing exclusion of specific methods by the contract (for example, the
contract could only add new methods but not exclude the ones prescribed by law).

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
These restrictions as to the choice of methods should be borne in mind by drafters if they decide to include other methods of
service either in substitution or in addition to the ones prescribed by law. If the inclusion of additional methods of service in
the contract is possible under the applicable law, the inclusion of such methods as service by email, if it is not provided in civil
procedural rules, would be beneficial.
Parties should also consider any additional requirements that may be provided by the law of the chosen jurisdiction. This could
include, for example, the requirement to obtain court permission to serve a party (especially outside of jurisdiction). If there is
such a requirement, the parties are unlikely to circumvent it by providing methods of service in addition to the ones prescribed
by law (unless the same is provided by law itself, for example, permission not required if served by email).
References to a notices provision
7-024
If parties decide to extend the notices clause to the service of the proceedings, they must make sure that the wording of the
notices clause reflects this intention. A simple way to do this is to include a separate provision that just specifies that the service
of the proceedings can be effected as per the notice provision. Whatever their choice, they must make sure that the wording is
unambiguous and clear as to what the intentions of the parties are.
If parties decide to include a separate provision referring to the notice clause for the methods of service of legal proceedings,
the wording of such provision could be as follows:
“[Each party /[Party A] / [Party B]] irrevocably consents to any process in any legal action or proceedings
under [Jurisdiction clause] above being served on it in accordance with the provisions of this agreement
relating to service of notices of claims. Nothing contained in this agreement shall affect the right to serve
process in any other manner permitted by law.”
“[Each party /[Party A] / [Party B]] irrevocably consents to any process in any legal action or proceedings
under [Jurisdiction clause] above…”.
Drafters can also choose whether the service provision applies to all the parties of the contract or only one of them. There may
be some issues in preferring one of the parties over the other in some jurisdictions (akin to asymmetric jurisdiction clauses
discussed in para.7-013) and the relevant jurisdictional requirements may need to be checked for any restrictions or default
consequences.
The clause should also make it clear that the parties are consenting to be served by the methods prescribed under the contract
(although this may be subject to mandatory rules of law of a particular jurisdiction).
“…being served on it in accordance with the provisions of this agreement relating to service of notices of
claims…”.
This is a reference to the service in a notices provision. That provision could include not just service of formal notices but also
service of claims/proceedings. It is important that this is drafted explicitly to include this provision regarding service of claims/
proceedings in the wording (rather than exclude it as some examples of the provisions could do).

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
18
“…Nothing contained in this agreement shall affect the right to serve process in any other manner permitted
by law.”
This is the wording that allows other methods of service permitted by the law of the chosen jurisdiction. In this sense, it makes
the service of proceedings provisions additional to the methods of service prescribed by law, rather than to their exclusion. This
is a much safer approach as it avoids any unintended consequences if a contractual clause is found to be in conflict with the
relevant procedural law.
At the same time, if the parties decide that those methods are preferred, this allows the parties adopting this provision to use
other methods of service provided by law to effect the service of the proceedings. The party to be served should bear this in
mind when providing its address and other contact details, as they might be used to effect the service of proceedings on it not
just by the methods prescribed by the contract, but also the ones prescribed by law in the chosen jurisdiction. It is therefore best
to check with local lawyers of that jurisdiction as to what methods are permitted to make sure the party actually receives the
proceedings, if such are commenced, rather than being unaware of them. The consequences of being unaware can be significant,
including potential default judgments and other consequences against it later on.
Governing law—overview
7-025
Governing law clauses can play a critically important role in a contract. There are three stages at which it is important to have
clarity on the choice of law: when drafting, when performing and after a dispute has arisen.
In the event of a dispute between the parties, these clauses determine the law the parties will rely on to determine their rights
and obligations and to interpret the contract itself. Moreover, they are important for the decision-maker resolving the dispute (a
judge or an arbitrator) to rule on those rights and obligations and ultimately to determine the outcome of any contractual dispute.
As discussed in para.7-005, the choice of governing law is different to the choice of jurisdiction: the former is the substantive
law of the contract, whereas the jurisdiction clause defines the court or legal venue where a dispute would be resolved. This
is important to appreciate when drafting, as a choice of jurisdiction alone does not necessarily mean that the applicable law of
the contract will be of that of the chosen jurisdiction and vice versa.
If there is no particular law stated in the contract, and the parties cannot agree, the courts would have to apply the relevant
national rules for conflict of laws to determine which law would apply. As a result, the absence of a choice of law clause risks
escalating the dispute between the parties.
Additionally, the absence of a contractual definition of the chosen law creates uncertainty as to what the parties’ rights and
obligations are under the contract. This is compounded by the fact that national laws of different countries may contain different
rules and mandatory provisions for the parties to follow in the event of a dispute. Until the applicable law is determined by
a decision-maker, the parties will be left with uncertainty as to the appropriate cause of action and chances of success in the
event of a dispute.
Moreover, the contract drafters themselves may need to take into account the applicable law at the time of drafting, as certain
mandatory provisions from the relevant national law may need to be included or considered and this may affect the precise
wording of the provisions and terminology used in the contract.
It is therefore very important to properly consider, choose and incorporate the governing law into the contract. When considering
which law to choose, the following points stated below may need to be borne in mind.

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
19
Governing law—considerations
7-026
A common starting point to consider is the question of which system(s) of law is natural to the parties. If the parties are, for
example, from common law jurisdictions, it would be sensible to specify the substantive law of a common law jurisdiction with
the converse possibly applying to parties who are both from civil law countries. However, a particular governing law may be
chosen because it is commonly used in the sector (e.g. English law for shipping contracts). For practical reasons, it is also worth
considering the law of the place of performance of the contract. Things can be a bit more complicated for multi-party contracts
but the need to make a choice of law remains.
It is not uncommon for situations to arise where a court determines litigation that is being conducted with the dispute being
governed by a different substantive law to the law of the jurisdiction and this is even more common for international arbitration.
Most often these situations are where both parties are located in different jurisdictions which share commonly held perceptions
of the lack of confidence in, or the independence of, their own national judicial processes. Such a choice can also end up being
made when neither party will agree to the law of the other’s jurisdiction and, ultimately, they both prefer a neutral choice.
If the parties cannot agree on choice of law of a particular country, drafters should naturally consider such factors as reputation
of a particular law in international commercial contracts; whether this is a usual choice for the relevant industry or sector;
whether it will be easy to find lawyers/arbitrators to deal with any future dispute; whether it is perceived to provide fairness
between the parties; and whether the law provides sufficient certainty.
English law is generally perceived to provide fairness, certainty and predictability of the outcome of the dispute, as well as being
based on the principle of freedom of the parties to contract on the terms they choose. In turn, this provides for lesser regulation
and more flexibility. These factors can make English law attractive to international parties as the governing law of the contract.
If parties to international commercial transactions cannot agree with each other on which law to choose, this perception of
English law is often seen to provide a neutral choice of law that puts neither party at an advantage or disadvantage.
Although the substantive law does not automatically have to be the law of the chosen jurisdiction or forum, it can become
complicated if a national court hears a matter governed by a different law. Having said that, this situation is not so uncommon.
This is largely because the national judges in the chosen jurisdiction may not be specialists in the substantive law of the contract.
In this event, foreign law experts may need to give evidence on foreign law to allow the judges to understand what is meant.
This can increase the costs and time for the dispute to be considered in court. It also requires the parties to instruct foreign
lawyers throughout the proceedings to advise on foreign law when drafting pleadings and providing advice to clients.
Depending on the rules of evidence applicable in a particular jurisdiction, foreign law evidence may have to be presented not
only in the form of a written expert report on what the foreign law is, but also in the form of oral evidence, including cross-
examination of experts in foreign law. This is usually both costly and time consuming, as well as being demanding of the skills
of the chosen advocates to grasp the specifics of a particular foreign law system. Even if an advocate representing a party in the
dispute is dual-qualified, the court is not likely to accept their submissions on the substantive law as they would not be considered
to be independent and, for that reason alone, are not likely to be accepted as an expert in the substantive law of the contract.
The issue of qualifications and experience also applies to judges. For an effective hearing, they would need to be experienced
enough to apply the foreign law provisions to the facts/issues in question and, most importantly, to command the trust and
confidence of both parties that they have the necessary understanding and are independent.
As a practical matter, not every jurisdiction will be able to provide judges with the right experience and, as a result, not all the
judges appointed to a particular matter would be able to conduct a hearing without any issues. This likely shortage of suitable
judges could also lead to delays in the timing of any hearings. It is easy to envisage circumstances where many such judges still
struggle to come to the right conclusions on what the law is, especially if there is a dispute between the experts on a controversial
issue or how to interpret certain provisions of the foreign law.
As a general guideline, it is much better for all parties to try to agree the law of the forum to be the governing law of the dispute.
Another point to bear in mind is that, for countries operating under a federal system with states or provinces and for countries
structured with strong regional autonomy referring to the law of a particular country may not necessarily be specific enough

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
20
and one may need to specify the law of a particular jurisdiction within that country. Examples of countries like this include the
US, Canada, Australia, India, Spain, Switzerland, Belgium and the UK. As a result, for example, specifying “the Courts of the
United Kingdom” or “under the law of the United States of America” is likely to be considered to be ambiguous and provoke
further arguments as to the law of which jurisdiction or of which state would apply.
When drafting a governing law clause, an additional point for consideration is whether the governing law would be the same
for each of the issues that could arise out of the contract, as well as non-contractual obligations. Whilst there may be some
considerations why one would want different laws applied to different issues (for example, if the choice of law for each issue
could help their business to avoid/reduce responsibility or get more rights), drafters should be aware that this may present more
problems than benefits. As such, it is recommended to avoid split law clauses.
These circumstances are likely to generate arguments about the scope of those issues and which law applies to each of them.
Contractual and non-contractual obligations (e.g. liability under tort and contract) may need to be pleaded at the same time. If
this happens, the court or tribunal would have to apply various laws and norms of various jurisdictions, which will only confuse
the matter, and increase costs and the time to consider each issue in question. This would also require foreign law experts to
give evidence to deal with each issue separately, which will again not lead to the most effective way of resolving the dispute.
From the above considerations, it is clearly preferable to include one governing law for all issues, both contractual and non-
contractual, that might arise from the relevant relationship between the parties. At the same time, it is equally clear that, for most
circumstances, it is preferable that the chosen jurisdiction is the same country as the laws which would apply to the contract.
However, despite the issues highlighted above, there are still some circumstances where the parties may prefer the substantive
law of their own (or other party’s) nations because they are familiar with, e.g. the language, customs and legal principles but
decide to specify different court jurisdiction in the following situations:
 
(1)The parties prefer the perceived neutrality and fairness of the courts of their agreed jurisdiction. This is one of the main
reasons why parties might choose English courts as their jurisdiction.
 
(2)The courts in the chosen jurisdiction are perceived to offer a higher quality, more efficient and more cost-effective legal
system and procedures.
 
(3)The jurisdiction chosen for dispute resolution may have treaties and conventions in place that make it easier to enforce
judgments in other countries.
 
(4)The chosen jurisdiction might have specialised courts or expertise in certain areas of law (such as intellectual property,
property or construction) that are relevant to the contract. The parties could sometimes benefit from the specialised
knowledge of judges or arbitrators in that jurisdiction.
Brexit-impact on choice of law clauses
7-027
As stated in para.7-026, English law is often chosen as a governing law of the contract on the basis of its neutrality and
predictability. However, post-Brexit, contract drafters may wonder whether it is still wise to choose English law. Whilst some
substantive provisions of English law could have changed (and the contract drafters should check the changes accordingly),
Brexit itself did not substantially affect the choice of law clauses.
Pre-Brexit and during the transition period, the questions of the choice of law were governed by Regulation 593/2008 on the
law applicable to contractual obligations (Rome I) 18  and Regulation No 864/2007 on the law applicable to non-contractual
obligations (Rome II). 19  Both Rome I (art.3) and Rome II (art.14) contain provisions for the choice of the parties concluding
the choice of law agreements to be respected.
Rome I and Rome II do not require reciprocity, meaning that they can be applied in the UK irrespective of whether the EU
Member States are bound by the same obligations towards the UK and vice versa. The UK transposed these Regulations into

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
21
its domestic law (with a few non-substantive changes), 20  which became part of the UK national law, 21  which meant that the
Rome I and Rome II Regulations were retained as part of the national law.
In summary, nothing has substantially changed in relation to the choice of law agreements post-Brexit. Given the non-reciprocal
nature of the Rome I and Rome II Regulations governing the choice of law, the same or very similar rules still apply. It is
therefore unlikely that Brexit itself affects the choice of law agreements.
Governing law clause
7-028
A typical example of a governing law clause looks like this:
“This agreement and any dispute or claim (including non-contractual disputes or claims) arising out of or
in connection with it or its subject matter or formation shall be governed by and construed in accordance
with the law of [specify jurisdiction].”
“This agreement and any dispute or claim (including non-contractual disputes or claims)…”.
This clause includes specific reference to the substantive agreement as well as expanding the scope to include any disputes,
whether contractual or not.
“…arising out of or in connection with it or its subject matter or formation…”.
This covers other matters related to the contract, anything that the contract covers itself as well as its existence or formation.
“…shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the law of [specify jurisdiction]”.
This element makes it clear that the rights and obligations, as well as interpretation of the contract, would be in accordance
with the laws of chosen jurisdiction.
Linking litigation to other methods of dispute resolution
7-029
Like arbitration, litigation is a final and binding dispute resolution method. It is also very jurisdiction-specific, in the sense that
it will vary depending on the civil procedure rules of courts of a particular jurisdiction. Whilst in some jurisdictions the courts
will be very familiar with international disputes, in other jurisdictions they might be more domestically focused and not always
reflect the international nature of the dispute or of the parties.
As litigation is also a very formal dispute resolution method, the selection of lawyers may be limited for the parties (due to the
local regulatory/licencing requirements), as well as the ability of the parties to represent themselves, again depending on local
rules and laws. The parties may be quite restricted in what they can do and what they can achieve in resolving their dispute

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
22
through the courts. In contrast to arbitration or mediation, it is unlikely that the parties could select a neutral third party to resolve
their dispute. Instead, the dispute will be resolved by a judge, who is likely to be appointed rather than selected. Moreover, the
litigation may be a public process by default and, therefore, expose the parties to unnecessary public or media attention.
In some jurisdictions it could be compulsory to at least attempt other methods of dispute resolution before proceeding
with litigation or the litigation process itself may refer parties to other methods of resolving disputes. There may be costs
consequences for the parties for not doing so. This is discussed in more detail in Chapter Three.
Given the substantial costs implications of litigation, as well as differences in local rules and traditions in relation to court
proceedings, it is important to consider other methods of dispute resolution alongside or instead of litigation. This could
be mediation or negotiation, which precede litigation or take place when litigation is afoot. Drafters considering including
a jurisdiction clause should also consider including an escalation clause, which requires parties to engage in other dispute
resolution method(s), such as mediation, before proceeding with litigation (see Chapter Two).
Drafters should also weigh all the factors in favour of litigation before selecting this dispute resolution method. It may well be
that the dispute is more suitable for other binding methods, such as arbitration or expert determination. Given the diversity of
local rules on jurisdiction and the differences in the approach to the enforcement of judgments across various jurisdictions, it
is important to consider whether arbitration should be chosen instead.
Footnotes
1
Statute Law Revision Act 1873.
2
Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, Diana Beltekian and Max Roser, Trade and Globalization (2018), Our World In Data, https://
ourworldindata.org/trade-and-globalization.
3
See, for example, Chapter Eight for the discussion.
4
See Chapter Six on arbitration for further details.
5
See Chapter Eight.
6
Regulation 1215/2012 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters
(recast) (Recast Brussels Regulation) [2012] OJ L351/1.
7
See Recast Brussels Regulation art.25.
8
Convention on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (also known as the Lugano
Convention) [2007] OJ L339/3.
9
Some Commonwealth and other countries, including EU and EFTA states, are covered by the statutory regime. See
Reciprocal Enforcement of Judgments (Administration of Justice Act 1920, Part II) (Amendment) Order 1985 (SI
1985/1994) and the list of the countries covered by the act is provided in Sch.1. See also the Foreign Judgments
(Reciprocal Enforcement) Act 1933 dealing with statutory regime of reciprocal arrangements.
10
See art.9 of the Hague Convention 2005 and the discussion on enforcement in the chapter.
11
The comparison of these grounds is beyond the scope of this book.
12
Adams v Cape Industries Plc [1990] Ch. 433; [1990] 2 W.L.R. 657 CA.
13
Rubin v Eurofinance SA [2012] UKSC 46; [2013] 1 A.C. 236.
14
See, for example, s.2, Ch.II, arts 7–9 of the Recast Brussels Regulation.
15
See, however, the discussion on the Hague Convention 2019 in para.7-008.
16
Bank of New York Mellon v GV Films Ltd [2009] EWHC 2338 (Comm); [2010] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 365 at [14], per Field J;
Donohue v Armco Inc [2001] UKHL 64; [2002] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 425 at [36], per Lord Bingham; Mauritius Commercial
Bank Ltd v Hestia Holdings Ltd [2013] EWHC 1328 (Comm); [2013] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 121.
17
Apple Sales International v eBizcuss : Cass. 1ere Civ, 7 October 2015, 14-16.898; Ste Saint Joseph v Dexia Banque
Internationale, n°17-21309, 3 October 2018; Ourspace Ventures Ltd v Halliwell [2019] EWHC 3475 (Ch); Ilya
Komarevski and Eleonora Mateina, “Dispute Resolution: Unilateral dispute resolution clauses in Bulgaria” (12 October
2015), IFLR1000, https://www.iflr1000.com/.
18
Regulation 593/2008 on the law applicable to contractual obligations (Rome I) [2008] OJ L177/6.
19
Regulation No 864/2007 on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations (Rome II) [2007] OJ L199/40.
20
See Jurisdiction, Judgments and Applicable Law (Amendment) (EU Exit) Regulations 2020 (SI 2020/1574).

Chapter 7 - Litigation, Jurisdiction and Governing Law Clauses, UKBC-EFFDIS...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
23
21
The Law Applicable to Contractual Obligations and Non-Contractual Obligations (Amendment etc.) (UK Exit)
Regulations 2019 (SI 2019/834).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
