Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International
Commercial Arbitration 1985
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration 1985
(As adopted by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on 21 June 1985 and amended by the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law on 7 July 2006)
Chapter I. General Provisions
Article 1. Scope of application 1
(1) This Law applies to international commercial 2  arbitration, subject to any agreement in force between this State
and any other State or States.
(2) The provisions of this Law, except articles 8, 9, 17 H, 17 I, 17 J, 35 and 36, apply only if the place of arbitration
is in the territory of this State.
(Article 1(2) has been amended by the Commission at its thirty-ninth session, in 2006)
(3) An arbitration is international if:
 
(a) the parties to an arbitration agreement have, at the time of the conclusion of that agreement, their places
of business in different States; or
 
(b) one of the following places is situated outside the State in which the parties have their places of business:
 
(i) the place of arbitration if determined in, or pursuant to, the arbitration agreement;
 
(ii) any place where a substantial part of the obligations of the commercial relationship is to be
performed or the place with which the subject-matter of the dispute is most closely connected; or
 
(c) the parties have expressly agreed that the subject matter of the arbitration agreement relates to more
than one country.
(4) For the purposes of paragraph (3) of this article:
 
(a) if a party has more than one place of business, the place of business is that which has the closest
relationship to the arbitration agreement;
 
(b) if a party does not have a place of business, reference is to be made to his habitual residence.
(5) This Law shall not affect any other law of this State by virtue of which certain disputes may not be submitted to
arbitration or may be submitted to arbitration only according to provisions other than those of this Law.

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Article 2. Definitions and rules of interpretation
For the purposes of this Law:
 
(a) ‘arbitration’ means any arbitration whether or not administered by a permanent arbitral institution;
 
(b) ‘arbitral tribunal’ means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators;
 
(c) ‘court’ means a body or organ of the judicial system of a State;
 
(d) where a provision of this Law, except article 28, leaves the parties free to determine a certain issue,
such freedom includes the right of the parties to authorize a third party, including an institution, to make
that determination;
 
(e) where a provision of this Law refers to the fact that the parties have agreed or that they may agree or
in any other way refers to an agreement of the parties, such agreement includes any arbitration rules
referred to in that agreement;
 
(f) where a provision of this Law, other than in articles 25(a) and 32(2)(a), refers to a claim, it also applies
to a counter-claim, and where it refers to a defence, it also applies to a defence to such counter-claim.
Article 2A. International origin and general principles
(As adopted by the Commission at its thirty-ninth session, in 2006)
(1) In the interpretation of this Law, regard is to be had to its international origin and to the need to promote uniformity
in its application and the observance of good faith.
(2) Questions concerning matters governed by this Law which are not expressly settled in it are to be settled in
conformity with the general principles on which this Law is based.
Article 3. Receipt of written communications
(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties:
 
(a) any written communication is deemed to have been received if it is delivered to the addressee personally
or if it is delivered at his place of business, habitual residence or mailing address; if none of these can
be found after making a reasonable inquiry, a written communication is deemed to have been received
if it is sent to the addressee’s last-known place of business, habitual residence or mailing address by
registered letter or any other means which provides a record of the attempt to deliver it;
 
(b) the communication is deemed to have been received on the day it is so delivered.
(2) The provisions of this article do not apply to communications in court proceedings.
Article 4. Waiver of right to object
A party who knows that any provision of this Law from which the parties may derogate or any requirement under the
arbitration agreement has not been complied with and yet proceeds with the arbitration without stating his objection

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
to such non-compliance without undue delay or, if a time-limit is provided therefore, within such period of time, shall
be deemed to have waived his right to object.
Article 5. Extent of court intervention
In matters governed by this Law, no court shall intervene except where so provided in this Law.
Article 6. Court or other authority for certain functions of arbitration assistance and
supervision
The functions referred to in articles 11(3), 11(4), 13(3), 14, 16(3) and 34(2) shall be performed by … [Each State
enacting this model law specifies the court, courts or, where referred to therein, other authority competent to perform
these functions.]
Chapter II. Arbitration Agreement
Option I
Article 7. Definition and form of arbitration agreement
(As adopted by the Commission at its thirty-ninth session, in 2006)
(1) ‘Arbitration agreement’ is an agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have
arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not. An
arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of a separate agreement.
(2) The arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
(3) An arbitration agreement is in writing if its content is recorded in any form, whether or not the arbitration agreement
or contract has been concluded orally, by conduct, or by other means.
(4) The requirement that an arbitration agreement be in writing is met by an electronic communication if the
information contained therein is accessible so as to be useable for subsequent reference; ‘electronic communication’
means any communication that the parties make by means of data messages; ‘data message’ means information
generated, sent, received or stored by electronic, magnetic, optical or similar means, including, but not limited to,
electronic data interchange (EDI), electronic mail, telegram, telex or telecopy.
(5) Furthermore, an arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in an exchange of statements of claim and
defence in which the existence of an agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other.
(6) The reference in a contract to any document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an arbitration agreement
in writing, provided that the reference is such as to make that clause part of the contract.
Option II
Article 7. Definition of arbitration agreement
(As adopted by the Commission at its thirty-ninth session, in 2006)

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
‘Arbitration agreement’ is an agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen
or which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual or not.
Article 8. Arbitration agreement and substantive claim before court
(1) A court before which an action is brought in a matter which is the subject of an arbitration agreement shall, if a
party so requests not later than when submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute, refer the parties
to arbitration unless it finds that the agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed.
(2) Where an action referred to in paragraph (1) of this article has been brought, arbitral proceedings may nevertheless
be commenced or continued, and an award may be made, while the issue is pending before the court.
Article 9. Arbitration agreement and interim measures by court
It is not incompatible with an arbitration agreement for a party to request, before or during arbitral proceedings, from
a court an interim measure of protection and for a court to grant such measure.
Chapter III. Composition of Arbitral Tribunal
Article 10. Number of arbitrators
(1) The parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators.
(2) Failing such determination, the number of arbitrators shall be three.
Article 11. Appointment of arbitrators
(1) No person shall be precluded by reason of his nationality from acting as an arbitrator, unless otherwise agreed
by the parties.
(2) The parties are free to agree on a procedure of appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators, subject to the provisions
of paragraphs (4) and (5) of this article.
(3) Failing such agreement,
 
(a) in an arbitration with three arbitrators, each party shall appoint one arbitrator, and the two arbitrators
thus appointed shall appoint the third arbitrator; if a party fails to appoint the arbitrator within thirty
days of receipt of a request to do so from the other party, or if the two arbitrators fail to agree on the
third arbitrator within thirty days of their appointment, the appointment shall be made, upon request of
a party, by the court or other authority specified in article 6;
 
(b) in an arbitration with a sole arbitrator, if the parties are unable to agree on the arbitrator, he shall be
appointed, upon request of a party, by the court or other authority specified in article 6.
(4) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties,
 
(a) a party fails to act as required under such procedure, or
 
(b) the parties, or two arbitrators, are unable to reach an agreement expected of them under such procedure,
or

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
 
(c) a third party, including an institution, fails to perform any function entrusted to it under such procedure,
any party may request the court or other authority specified in article 6 to take the necessary measure,
unless the agreement on the appointment procedure provides other means for securing the appointment.
(5) A decision on a matter entrusted by paragraph (3) or (4) of this article to the court or other authority specified in
article 6 shall be subject to no appeal. The court or other authority, in appointing an arbitrator, shall have due regard
to any qualifications required of the arbitrator by the agreement of the parties and to such considerations as are likely
to secure the appointment of an independent and impartial arbitrator and, in the case of a sole or third arbitrator, shall
take into account as well the advisability of appointing an arbitrator of a nationality other than those of the parties.
Article 12. Grounds for challenge
(1) When a person is approached in connection with his possible appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose any
circumstances likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his impartiality or independence. An arbitrator, from the
time of his appointment and throughout the arbitral proceedings, shall without delay disclose any such circumstances
to the parties unless they have already been informed of them by him.
(2) An arbitrator may be challenged only if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his impartiality
or independence, or if he does not possess qualifications agreed to by the parties. A party may challenge an arbitrator
appointed by him, or in whose appointment he has participated, only for reasons of which he becomes aware after
the appointment has been made.
Article 13. Challenge procedure
(1) The parties are free to agree on a procedure for challenging an arbitrator, subject to the provisions of paragraph
(3) of this article.
(2) Failing such agreement, a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator shall, within fifteen days after becoming
aware of the constitution of the arbitral tribunal or after becoming aware of any circumstance referred to in article
12(2), send a written statement of the reasons for the challenge to the arbitral tribunal. Unless the challenged arbitrator
withdraws from his office or the other party agrees to the challenge, the arbitral tribunal shall decide on the challenge.
(3) If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or under the procedure of paragraph (2) of this article
is not successful, the challenging party may request, within thirty days after having received notice of the decision
rejecting the challenge, the court or other authority specified in article 6 to decide on the challenge, which decision
shall be subject to no appeal; while such a request is pending, the arbitral tribunal, including the challenged arbitrator,
may continue the arbitral proceedings and make an award.
Article 14. Failure or impossibility to act
(1) If an arbitrator becomes de jure or de facto unable to perform his functions or for other reasons fails to act
without undue delay, his mandate terminates if he withdraws from his office or if the parties agree on the termination.
Otherwise, if a controversy remains concerning any of these grounds, any party may request the court or other authority
specified in article 6 to decide on the termination of the mandate, which decision shall be subject to no appeal.
(2) If, under this article or article 13(2), an arbitrator withdraws from his office or a party agrees to the termination
of the mandate of an arbitrator, this does not imply acceptance of the validity of any ground referred to in this article
or article 12(2).

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
Article 15. Appointment of substitute arbitrator
Where the mandate of an arbitrator terminates under article 13 or 14 or because of his withdrawal from office for
any other reason or because of the revocation of his mandate by agreement of the parties or in any other case of
termination of his mandate, a substitute arbitrator shall be appointed according to the rules that were applicable to
the appointment of the arbitrator being replaced.
Chapter IV. Jurisdiction of Arbitral Tribunal
Article 16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction
(1) The arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including any objections with respect to the existence or
validity of the arbitration agreement. For that purpose, an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be
treated as an agreement independent of the other terms of the contract. A decision by the arbitral tribunal that the
contract is null and void shall not entail ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitration clause.
(2) A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later than the submission of the
statement of defence. A party is not precluded from raising such a plea by the fact that he has appointed, or participated
in the appointment of, an arbitrator. A plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope of its authority shall be
raised as soon as the matter alleged to be beyond the scope of its authority is raised during the arbitral proceedings.
The arbitral tribunal may, in either case, admit a later plea if it considers the delay justified.
(3) The arbitral tribunal may rule on a plea referred to in paragraph (2) of this article either as a preliminary question
or in an award on the merits. If the arbitral tribunal rules as a preliminary question that it has jurisdiction, any party
may request, within thirty days after having received notice of that ruling, the court specified in article 6 to decide
the matter, which decision shall be subject to no appeal; while such a request is pending, the arbitral tribunal may
continue the arbitral proceedings and make an award.
Chapter IV A. Interim Measures and Preliminary Orders
(As adopted by the Commission at its thirty-ninth session, in 2006)
Section 1. Interim measures
Article 17. Power of arbitral tribunal to order interim measures
(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal may, at the request of a party, grant interim measures.
(2) An interim measure is any temporary measure, whether in the form of an award or in another form, by which, at any
time prior to the issuance of the award by which the dispute is finally decided, the arbitral tribunal orders a party to:
 
(a) Maintain or restore the status quo pending determination of the dispute;
 
(b) Take action that would prevent, or refrain from taking action that is likely to cause, current or imminent
harm or prejudice to the arbitral process itself;
 
(c) Provide a means of preserving assets out of which a subsequent award may be satisfied; or

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
 
(d) Preserve evidence that may be relevant and material to the resolution of the dispute.
Article 17A. Conditions for granting interim measures
(1) The party requesting an interim measure under article 17(2)(a), (b) and (c) shall satisfy the arbitral tribunal that:
 
(a) Harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages is likely to result if the measure is not ordered,
and such harm substantially outweighs the harm that is likely to result to the party against whom the
measure is directed if the measure is granted; and
 
(b) There is a reasonable possibility that the requesting party will succeed on the merits of the claim. The
determination on this possibility shall not affect the discretion of the arbitral tribunal in making any
subsequent determination.
(2) With regard to a request for an interim measure under article 17(2)(d), the requirements in paragraphs (1)(a) and
(b) of this article shall apply only to the extent the arbitral tribunal considers appropriate.
Section 2. Preliminary orders
Article 17B. Applications for preliminary orders and conditions for granting preliminary orders
(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party may, without notice to any other party, make a request for an
interim measure together with an application for a preliminary order directing a party not to frustrate the purpose of
the interim measure requested.
(2) The arbitral tribunal may grant a preliminary order provided it considers that prior disclosure of the request for
the interim measure to the party against whom it is directed risks frustrating the purpose of the measure.
(3) The conditions defined under article 17A apply to any preliminary order, provided that the harm to be assessed
under article 17A(1)(a), is the harm likely to result from the order being granted or not.
Article 17C. Specific regime for preliminary orders
(1) Immediately after the arbitral tribunal has made a determination in respect of an application for a preliminary
order, the arbitral tribunal shall give notice to all parties of the request for the interim measure, the application for the
preliminary order, the preliminary order, if any, and all other communications, including by indicating the content of
any oral communication, between any party and the arbitral tribunal in relation thereto.
(2) At the same time, the arbitral tribunal shall give an opportunity to any party against whom a preliminary order is
directed to present its case at the earliest practicable time.
(3) The arbitral tribunal shall decide promptly on any objection to the preliminary order.
(4) A preliminary order shall expire after twenty days from the date on which it was issued by the arbitral tribunal.
However, the arbitral tribunal may issue an interim measure adopting or modifying the preliminary order, after the
party against whom the preliminary order is directed has been given notice and an opportunity to present its case.
(5) A preliminary order shall be binding on the parties but shall not be subject to enforcement by a court. Such a
preliminary order does not constitute an award.

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
Section 3. Provisions applicable to
interim measures and preliminary orders
Article 17D. Modification, suspension, termination
The arbitral tribunal may modify, suspend or terminate an interim measure or a preliminary order it has granted, upon
application of any party or, in exceptional circumstances and upon prior notice to the parties, on the arbitral tribunal’s
own initiative.
Article 17E. Provision of security
(1) The arbitral tribunal may require the party requesting an interim measure to provide appropriate security in
connection with the measure.
(2) The arbitral tribunal shall require the party applying for a preliminary order to provide security in connection with
the order unless the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate or unnecessary to do so.
Article 17F. Disclosure
(1) The arbitral tribunal may require any party promptly to disclose any material change in the circumstances on the
basis of which the measure was requested or granted.
(2) The party applying for a preliminary order shall disclose to the arbitral tribunal all circumstances that are likely
to be relevant to the arbitral tribunal’s determination whether to grant or maintain the order, and such obligation
shall continue until the party against whom the order has been requested has had an opportunity to present its case.
Thereafter, paragraph (1) of this article shall apply.
Article 17G. Costs and damages
The party requesting an interim measure or applying for a preliminary order shall be liable for any costs and damages
caused by the measure or the order to any party if the arbitral tribunal later determines that, in the circumstances,
the measure or the order should not have been granted. The arbitral tribunal may award such costs and damages at
any point during the proceedings.
Section 4. Recognition and enforcement of interim measures
Article 17H. Recognition and enforcement
(1) An interim measure issued by an arbitral tribunal shall be recognized as binding and, unless otherwise provided
by the arbitral tribunal, enforced upon application to the competent court, irrespective of the country in which it was
issued, subject to the provisions of article 17 I.
(2) The party who is seeking or has obtained recognition or enforcement of an interim measure shall promptly inform
the court of any termination, suspension or modification of that interim measure.
(3) The court of the State where recognition or enforcement is sought may, if it considers it proper, order the requesting
party to provide appropriate security if the arbitral tribunal has not already made a determination with respect to
security or where such a decision is necessary to protect the rights of third parties.
Article 17I. Grounds for refusing recognition or enforcement 3
(1) Recognition or enforcement of an interim measure may be refused only:
 
(a) At the request of the party against whom it is invoked if the court is satisfied that:

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
 
(i) Such refusal is warranted on the grounds set forth in article 36(1)(a)(i), (ii), (iii) or (iv); or
 
(ii) The arbitral tribunal’s decision with respect to the provision of security in connection with the
interim measure issued by the arbitral tribunal has not been complied with; or
 
(iii) The interim measure has been terminated or suspended by the arbitral tribunal or, where so
empowered, by the court of the State in which the arbitration takes place or under the law of which
that interim measure was granted; or
 
(b) If the court finds that:
 
(i) The interim measure is incompatible with the powers conferred upon the court unless the court
decides to reformulate the interim measure to the extent necessary to adapt it to its own powers and
procedures for the purposes of enforcing that interim measure and without modifying its substance;
or
 
(ii) Any of the grounds set forth in article 36(1)(b)(i) or (ii), apply to the recognition and enforcement
of the interim measure.
(2) Any determination made by the court on any ground in paragraph (1) of this article shall be effective only for the
purposes of the application to recognize and enforce the interim measure. The court where recognition or enforcement
is sought shall not, in making that determination, undertake a review of the substance of the interim measure.
Section 5. Court-ordered interim measures
Article 17J. Court-ordered interim measures
A court shall have the same power of issuing an interim measure in relation to arbitration proceedings, irrespective of
whether their place is in the territory of this State, as it has in relation to proceedings in courts. The court shall exercise
such power in accordance with its own procedures in consideration of the specific features of international arbitration.
Chapter V. Conduct of Arbitral Proceedings
Article 18. Equal treatment of parties
The parties shall be treated with equality and each party shall be given a full opportunity of presenting his case.
Article 19. Determination of rules of procedure
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Law, the parties are free to agree on the procedure to be followed by the arbitral
tribunal in conducting the proceedings.
(2) Failing such agreement, the arbitral tribunal may, subject to the provisions of this Law, conduct the arbitration
in such manner as it considers appropriate. The power conferred upon the arbitral tribunal includes the power to
determine the admissibility, relevance, materiality and weight of any evidence.

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
Article 20. Place of arbitration
(1) The parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration. Failing such agreement, the place of arbitration shall be
determined by the arbitral tribunal having regard to the circumstances of the case, including the convenience of the
parties.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this article, the arbitral tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed
by the parties, meet at any place it considers appropriate for consultation among its members, for hearing witnesses,
experts or the parties, or for inspection of goods, other property or documents.
Article 21. Commencement of arbitral proceedings
Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral proceedings in respect of a particular dispute commence on the
date on which a request for that dispute to be referred to arbitration is received by the respondent.
Article 22. Language
(1) The parties are free to agree on the language or languages to be used in the arbitral proceedings. Failing such
agreement, the arbitral tribunal shall determine the language or languages to be used in the proceedings. This
agreement or determination, unless otherwise specified therein, shall apply to any written statement by a party, any
hearing and any award, decision or other communication by the arbitral tribunal.
(2) The arbitral tribunal may order that any documentary evidence shall be accompanied by a translation into the
language or languages agreed upon by the parties or determined by the arbitral tribunal.
Article 23. Statements of claim and defence
(1) Within the period of time agreed by the parties or determined by the arbitral tribunal, the claimant shall state
the facts supporting his claim, the points at issue and the relief or remedy sought, and the respondent shall state his
defence in respect of these particulars, unless the parties have otherwise agreed as to the required elements of such
statements. The parties may submit with their statements all documents they consider to be relevant or may add a
reference to the documents or other evidence they will submit.
(2) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, either party may amend or supplement his claim or defence during the
course of the arbitral proceedings, unless the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate to allow such amendment
having regard to the delay in making it.
Article 24. Hearings and written proceedings
(1) Subject to any contrary agreement by the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall decide whether to hold oral hearings
for the presentation of evidence or for oral argument, or whether the proceedings shall be conducted on the basis of
documents and other materials. However, unless the parties have agreed that no hearings shall be held, the arbitral
tribunal shall hold such hearings at an appropriate stage of the proceedings, if so requested by a party.
(2) The parties shall be given sufficient advance notice of any hearing and of any meeting of the arbitral tribunal for
the purposes of inspection of goods, other property or documents.

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
(3) All statements, documents or other information supplied to the arbitral tribunal by one party shall be communicated
to the other party. Also any expert report or evidentiary document on which the arbitral tribunal may rely in making
its decision shall be communicated to the parties.
Article 25. Default of a party
Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, if, without showing sufficient cause,
 
(a) the claimant fails to communicate his statement of claim in accordance with article 23(1), the arbitral
tribunal shall terminate the proceedings;
 
(b) the respondent fails to communicate his statement of defence in accordance with article 23(1), the
arbitral tribunal shall continue the proceedings without treating such failure in itself as an admission
of the claimant’s allegations;
 
(c) any party fails to appear at a hearing or to produce documentary evidence, the arbitral tribunal may
continue the proceedings and make the award on the evidence before it.
Article 26. Expert appointed by arbitral tribunal
(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal
 
(a) may appoint one or more experts to report to it on specific issues to be determined by the arbitral
tribunal;
 
(b) may require a party to give the expert any relevant information or to produce, or to provide access to,
any relevant documents, goods or other property for his inspection.
(2) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, if a party so requests or if the arbitral tribunal considers it necessary, the
expert shall, after delivery of his written or oral report, participate in a hearing where the parties have the opportunity
to put questions to him and to present expert witnesses in order to testify on the points at issue.
Article 27. Court assistance in taking evidence
The arbitral tribunal or a party with the approval of the arbitral tribunal may request from a competent court of this
State assistance in taking evidence.
The court may execute the request within its competence and according to its rules on taking evidence.
Chapter VI. Making of Award and Termination of Proceedings
Article 28. Rules applicable to substance of dispute
(1) The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with such rules of law as are chosen by the parties
as applicable to the substance of the dispute. Any designation of the law or legal system of a given State shall be
construed, unless otherwise expressed, as directly referring to the substantive law of that State and not to its conflict
of laws rules.

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
(2) Failing any designation by the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall apply the law determined by the conflict of laws
rules which it considers applicable.
(3) The arbitral tribunal shall decide ex aequo et bono or as amiable compositeur only if the parties have expressly
authorized it to do so.
(4) In all cases, the arbitral tribunal shall decide in accordance with the terms of the contract and shall take into account
the usages of the trade applicable to the transaction.
Article 29. Decision-making by panel of arbitrators
In arbitral proceedings with more than one arbitrator, any decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be made, unless
otherwise agreed by the parties, by a majority of all its members. However, questions of procedure may be decided
by a presiding arbitrator, if so authorized by the parties or all members of the arbitral tribunal.
Article 30. Settlement
(1) If, during arbitral proceedings, the parties settle the dispute, the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the proceedings
and, if requested by the parties and not objected to by the arbitral tribunal, record the settlement in the form of an
arbitral award on agreed terms.
(2) An award on agreed terms shall be made in accordance with the provisions of article 31 and shall state that it is
an award. Such an award has the same status and effect as any other award on the merits of the case.
Article 31. Form and contents of award
(1) The award shall be made in writing and shall be signed by the arbitrator or arbitrators. In arbitral proceedings with
more than one arbitrator, the signatures of the majority of all members of the arbitral tribunal shall suffice, provided
that the reason for any omitted signature is stated.
(2) The award shall state the reasons upon which it is based, unless the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be
given or the award is an award on agreed terms under article 30.
(3) The award shall state its date and the place of arbitration as determined in accordance with article 20(1). The
award shall be deemed to have been made at that place.
(4) After the award is made, a copy signed by the arbitrators in accordance with paragraph (1) of this article shall
be delivered to each party.
Article 32. Termination of proceedings
(1) The arbitral proceedings are terminated by the final award or by an order of the arbitral tribunal in accordance
with paragraph (2) of this article.
(2) The arbitral tribunal shall issue an order for the termination of the arbitral proceedings when:
 
(a) the claimant withdraws his claim, unless the respondent objects thereto and the arbitral tribunal
recognizes a legitimate interest on his part in obtaining a final settlement of the dispute;
 
(b) the parties agree on the termination of the proceedings;

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
 
(c) the arbitral tribunal finds that the continuation of the proceedings has for any other reason become
unnecessary or impossible.
(3) The mandate of the arbitral tribunal terminates with the termination of the arbitral proceedings, subject to the
provisions of articles 33 and 34(4).
Article 33. Correction and interpretation of award; additional award
(1) Within thirty days of receipt of the award, unless another period of time has been agreed upon by the parties:
 
(a) a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral tribunal to correct in the award any errors
in computation, any clerical or typographical errors or any errors of similar nature;
 
(b) if so agreed by the parties, a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral tribunal to
give an interpretation of a specific point or part of the award.
If the arbitral tribunal considers the request to be justified, it shall make the correction or give the interpretation within
thirty days of receipt of the request. The interpretation shall form part of the award.
(2) The arbitral tribunal may correct any error of the type referred to in paragraph (1)(a) of this article on its own
initiative within thirty days of the date of the award.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party, with notice to the other party, may request, within thirty days of
receipt of the award, the arbitral tribunal to make an additional award as to claims presented in the arbitral proceedings
but omitted from the award. If the arbitral tribunal considers the request to be justified, it shall make the additional
award within sixty days.
(4) The arbitral tribunal may extend, if necessary, the period of time within which it shall make a correction,
interpretation or an additional award under paragraph (1) or (3) of this article.
(5) The provisions of article 31 shall apply to a correction or interpretation of the award or to an additional award.
Chapter VII. Recourse against Award
Article 34. Application for setting aside as exclusive recourse against arbitral award
(1) Recourse to a court against an arbitral award may be made only by an application for setting aside in accordance
with paragraphs (2) and (3) of this article.
(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the court specified in article 6 only if:
 
(a) the party making the application furnishes proof that:
 
(i) a party to the arbitration agreement referred to in article 7 was under some incapacity; or the said
agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication
thereon, under the law of this State; or
 
(ii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator
or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or
 
(iii) the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the
submission to arbitration, or contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission
to arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
from those not so submitted, only that part of the award which contains decisions on matters not
submitted to arbitration may be set aside; or
 
(iv) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the
agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in conflict with a provision of this Law from
which the parties cannot derogate, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with this Law;
or
 
(b) the court finds that:
 
(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of this
State; or
 
(ii) the award is in conflict with the public policy of this State.
(3) An application for setting aside may not be made after three months have elapsed from the date on which the
party making that application had received the award or, if a request had been made under article 33, from the date
on which that request had been disposed of by the arbitral tribunal.
(4) The court, when asked to set aside an award, may, where appropriate and so requested by a party, suspend the
setting aside proceedings for a period of time determined by it in order to give the arbitral tribunal an opportunity
to resume the arbitral proceedings or to take such other action as in the arbitral tribunal’s opinion will eliminate the
grounds for setting aside.
Chapter VIII. Recognition and Enforcement of Awards
Article 35. Recognition and enforcement
(1) An arbitral award, irrespective of the country in which it was made, shall be recognized as binding and, upon
application in writing to the competent court, shall be enforced subject to the provisions of this article and of article 36.
(2) The party relying on an award or applying for its enforcement shall supply the original award or a copy thereof.
If the award is not made in an official language of this State, the court may request the party to supply a translation
thereof into such language. 4
(Article 35(2) has been amended by the Commission at its thirty-ninth session, in 2006)
Article 36.Grounds for refusing recognition or enforcement
(1) Recognition or enforcement of an arbitral award, irrespective of the country in which it was made, may be refused
only:
 
(a) at the request of the party against whom it is invoked, if that party furnishes to the competent court
where recognition or enforcement is sought proof that:
 
(i) a party to the arbitration agreement referred to in article 7 was under some incapacity; or the said
agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any indication
thereon, under the law of the country where the award was made; or
 
(ii) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment of
an arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or

Appendix A - UNCITRAL Model Law on International..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
 
(iii) the award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the
submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission
to arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated
from those not so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on matters submitted
to arbitration may be recognized and enforced; or
 
(iv) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the
agreement of the parties or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the
country where the arbitration took place; or
 
(v) the award has not yet become binding on the parties or has been set aside or suspended by a court
of the country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made; or
 
(b) if the court finds that:
 
(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of this
State; or
 
(ii) the recognition or enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of this State.
(2) If an application for setting aside or suspension of an award has been made to a court referred to in paragraph
(1)(a)(v) of this article, the court where recognition or enforcement is sought may, if it considers it proper, adjourn
its decision and may also, on the application of the party claiming recognition or enforcement of the award, order the
other party to provide appropriate security.
Footnotes
1
Article headings are for reference purposes only and are not to be used for purposes of interpretation.
2
The term ‘commercial’ should be given a wide interpretation so as to cover matters arising from all relationships of a
commercial nature, whether contractual or not. Relationships of a commercial nature include, but are not limited to, the
following transactions: any trade transaction for the supply or exchange of goods or services; distribution agreement;
commercial representation or agency; factoring; leasing; construction of works; consulting; engineering; licensing;
investment; financing; banking; insurance; exploitation agreement or concession; joint venture and other forms of
industrial or business cooperation; carriage of goods or passengers by air, sea, rail or road.
3
The conditions set forth in article 17I are intended to limit the number of circumstances in which the court may refuse
to enforce an interim measure. It would not be contrary to the level of harmonization sought to be achieved by these
model provisions if a State were to adopt fewer circumstances in which enforcement may be refused.
4
The conditions set forth in this paragraph are intended to set maximum standards. It would, thus, not be contrary to the
harmonization to be achieved by the model law if a State retained even less onerous conditions.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
