Article 4 of the IBA Rules on Evidence, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407063 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 4 of the IBA Rules on Evidence
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Article 4 of the IBA Rules on Evidence
25-33
Article 4(1) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides that “within the time ordered by the Tribunal, each Party shall identify
the witnesses on whose testimony it intends to rely and the subject matter of that testimony”. Parties exchange either witness
summaries or witness statements discussed below. Usually this will take place with or after the exchange of memorials and
well prior to the evidentiary hearings.
25-34
Unlike in the court system of some civil law jurisdictions, parties or their representatives may be witnesses under art.4(2) of
the IBA Rules on Evidence. And, in practice, anyone can be a fact witness in an ICC arbitration. 363  It is not improper for the
parties to interview witnesses and to discuss their testimony with them under art.4(3) of the IBA Rules on Evidence. 364
25-35
Article 4(4) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides for witness statements and art.4(5) of those Rules states that each witness
statement shall contain:
 
“(a)the full name and address of the witness, a statement regarding his or her present and past relationship
(if any) with any of the Parties, and a description of his or her background, qualifications, training and
experience, if such a description may be relevant to the dispute or to the contents of the statement;
 
(b)a full and detailed description of the facts, and the source of the witness’s information as to those facts,
sufficient to serve as that witness’s evidence in the matter in dispute. Documents on which the witness relies
that have not already been submitted shall be provided;
 
(c)a statement as to the language in which the Witness Statement was originally prepared and the language
in which the witness anticipates giving testimony at the Evidentiary Hearing;
 
(d)an affirmation of the truth of the Witness Statement; and
 
(e)the signature of the witness and its date and place.”
365
25-36
The ICC Rules contain no requirement of that sort and in practice, the format, content and quality of witness statements varies
greatly. Counsel of the parties may seek to follow the prescription of art.4(4) of the IBA Rules on Evidence when submitting
witness statements, as they are at the very minimum a helpful starting point for preparing witness statements.
25-37
Article 4(6) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides for supplemental witness statements. In many ICC arbitrations, parties
submit two sets of witness statements. 366  As discussed under art.20, witness statements must be provided in the language of the
arbitration, although this is not expressly stated in the IBA Rules on Evidence. If the witness is not sufficiently competent in that
language, a translation of his statement into the language of arbitration by the party providing the statement has to be submitted.

Article 4 of the IBA Rules on Evidence, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407063 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
25-38
The Working Group’s Commentary on Witness Statements for the 2020 version of the IBA Rules, notes in particular that:
“If witness statements are used, the evidence that a witness plans to give orally at the hearing is known in advance.
The other party can thereby better prepare its own examination of the witness and select the issues and witnesses
it will present. The tribunal is also in a better position to appreciate the testimony and put its own questions to
these witnesses. Witness statements may in this way contribute to a shortening of the length of oral hearings. For
instance, they may be considered as the “evidence in chief” (“direct evidence”), so that extensive explanation by
the witness becomes superfluous and examination by the other party can start almost immediately.
In order to save on hearing time and expense, witnesses need not appear unless their presence is requested by
a party or the arbitral tribunal (Article 8.1). Often the arbitral tribunal and the parties may agree that a witness
whose statement is either not contested or not considered material by the opposing party need not be present at
the oral hearing.”
25-39
Simultaneous witness statements provide for a more rapid procedure, but in some cases, a respondent may feel that this is
unfair, as he should see the claimant’s testimony first. It will ultimately be for the Tribunal to decide the sequence of witness
statements, and in doing so, it will seek to strike a balance between efficiency and fairness. To the extent that the parties have,
or are supposed to have set out all relevant factual allegations in their written pleadings, a respondent should in the normal
case suffer no prejudice if a simultaneous exchange of written statements is ordered. Having two rounds of witness statements
permits the Tribunal to have the comments of the witnesses on the evidence submitted by the other side, but adds to the duration
and costs of the proceedings. 367  A further variant is to permit counsel who has filed one or more witness statements to question
that witness to a limited extent in his introduction on evidence that has been submitted since the last witness statement has been
filed. In that manner, the outstanding factual or expert issues may be narrowed for the Tribunal and the witness can present in
person his or her evidence on these limited points. 368
25-40
Article 4(7) of the IBA Rules on Evidence makes provision for excusing witnesses, usually where their evidence is not
contentious. Where there are numerous witnesses, it is not infrequent that witnesses of secondary importance are not heard,
as the failure to hear the witness does not mean that the evidence as such is accepted (and it may well be contradicted by
documentary evidence).
25-41
Article 4(9) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides for seeking to obtain evidence of a witness who will not voluntarily testify.
The possibility of this will depend in most instances on the national law of the place where the person is located or perhaps
the law of the place of arbitration. It is relatively seldom that a Tribunal seeks to compel testimony due to the complications
involved and in particular the delay that can result in the proceedings. 369
25-42
Article 4(10) of the IBA Rules on Evidence provides the Tribunal with the possibility of requiring a party to assist in obtaining
evidence. However, most Tribunals are more reluctant to seek to require testimony than to order production of documents.
25-43
A related issue is how to treat a third party or former party who is in effect providing evidence against the interests of his or her
former employer. The often-repeated expression is that “there is no property in a witness”. However, witnesses may be subject
to confidentiality undertakings that effectively limit their ability to testify. Frequently, if these issues are raised, the parties seek
to work out some form of arrangement so that the witness can testify subject to limitations to protect issues such as trade secrets.

Article 4 of the IBA Rules on Evidence, UKBC-ICCARBN 474407063 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Footnotes
363
See para.25-27.
364
Bühler/Dorgan, “Witness Testimony Pursuant to the 1999 IBA Rules on Evidence in International Commercial
Arbitration—Novel or Tested Standards?”, (2000) J. Int. Arb. Vol.17 No.1, at p.7; Thorens, “L’arbitre international au
point de rencontre des traditions du droit civil et de la common law” in Etudes de droit international en l’honneur de
Pierre Lalive, op. cit., p.693.
365
The IBA Rules on Evidence do not require that the witness statement be sworn, but, under the lex arbitri, such
requirement may exist, see e.g. art.211 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the United Arab Emirates (Federal Law 11 of
1992) pursuant to which any witness evidence tendered shall be given under oath.
366
If there are two rounds of written submissions, the submissions of each round contain witness statements.
367
See Bühler, “Costs in arbitration. Some further considerations” in Liber amicorum in honour of Robert Briner, op. cit.,
p.179.
368
Article 4(6)(a) and (b) of the 2020 IBA Rules on Evidence anticipates that reply witness statements will deal with such
issues. However, if there are no such reply witness statements, dealing with such matters in a brief direct examination
may be appropriate.
369
Bühler/Dorgan, “Witness Testimony Pursuant to the 1999 IBA Rules on Evidence in International Commercial
Arbitration—Novel or Tested Standards?”, (2000) J. Int. Arb. Vol.17 No.1, p.18.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
