Article 24(1): Holding a case management conference, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406955...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 24(1): Holding a case management conference
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Introductory remarks
Article 24(1): Holding a case management conference
“When drawing up the Terms of Reference or as soon as possible thereafter, the arbitral tribunal shall hold a case
management conference to consult the parties on procedural measures that may be adopted pursuant to Article 22(2).”
24-4
For arbitrations subject to the Expedited Procedure Provisions, the Tribunal is required to convene the case management
conference within 15 days after having received the file. In addition, if the Expedited Procedure Provisions are applicable, the
Tribunal must ensure that the procedure adopted will result in an award being rendered within six months after the date of the
case management conference. Therefore, with respect to all of the issues discussed below, the timing issue will be central for
arbitration under the Expedited Procedure Provisions.
24-5
With respect to ICC arbitrations other than those conducted pursuant to the Expedited Procedure Provisions, pursuant to
art.24(1), the case management conference is to be held when the Terms of Reference are drawn up or as soon as possible
thereafter. As discussed under art.23, the Rules provide that the Terms of Reference are generally to be drawn up within 30 days
after the file has been transmitted to the Tribunal, and thus ideally, the case management conference should take place within
approximately one month of the transmittal of the file to the Tribunal. Therefore, in accepting a position as arbitrator, he or
she is undertaking to have reasonable availability to meet this requirement either by attending an in-person case management
conference or attending by way of video conference, provided the transmission of the file to the Tribunal is not delayed.
24-6
Article 24(1) is drafted in terms of a requirement that there be a case management conference. If the parties and the Tribunal
agree, they can dispense with a case management conference. The ICC Court will not refuse to approve signed Terms of
Reference or otherwise object if the parties and the Tribunal have agreed on the Terms of Reference and have agreed or made
submissions on procedural issues without a case management conference.
24-7
If a party insists that there be a case management conference, however, the party is entitled to have that conference pursuant to
art.24(1) and subject to the provisions of art.24(4) as to how that may be conducted.
24-8
Article 24(1) refers back to art.22(2), which provides as follows:
“In order to ensure effective case management, after consulting the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall adopt such
procedural measures as it considers appropriate, provided that they are not contrary to any agreement of the parties.
Such measures may include one or more of the case management techniques described in Appendix IV.”
24-9

Article 24(1): Holding a case management conference, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406955...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Therefore, art.24(1) is based on the principle that the parties may agree on the procedure and that, in any event, the parties
should be consulted prior to adopting procedural measures. As mentioned above, the actual subject matter of those procedural
measures is dealt with in various other provisions, and in art.25 and art.26 in particular.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
