Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration
1. 61
Before turning to the legal framework of international arbitration, we first examine briefly the object of international arbitration
and then go on to consider the meaning that should be attributed to the key words ‘international’ and ‘commercial’.
(a) The object of international arbitration
1. 62
The object of international arbitration is briefly stated. It is to obtain the fair resolution of a dispute by an independent and
impartial tribunal without undue delay or expense. This is easily said, but far less easily done. In fact, it raises a host of questions
to which we will revert in subsequent chapters. For example, is an arbitral tribunal bound to apply a specific applicable law or
an identified set of legal rules or does it, unlike the judge in a court of law, have discretion to award what seems to be ‘fair’
rather than what is legally correct? If an arbitral tribunal has such ‘discretion’, how far does it extend? For instance, does it
permit an arbitral tribunal to complete a contract that will not work on its existing wording? To take another example, how
do the concepts of ‘independence’ and ‘impartiality’ work in practice? Is an arbitrator who is regularly appointed by investors
in investment arbitrations genuinely independent or is he or she likely to have a bias in favour of investors? If the arbitrator
nominated by the law firm of one of the parties was the senior partner of that law firm until four years ago, can he or she be
regarded as genuinely impartial? These and other important questions will be considered in later chapters.
(b) What is meant by the word ‘international’?
1. 63
The reader of a book on international arbitration is entitled to be told at some stage what the authors mean by the word
‘international’—and for this to be followed by being told what is meant by the word ‘commercial’, since much of the book is
about disputes that in the international community are considered to be ‘commercial’. The problem is that there is no generally
agreed meaning of either term.
1. 64
‘When I use a word, it means just what I choose it to mean—neither more nor less’ said Humpty Dumpty, in a rather scornful
tone in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking Glass; 50  and in the wonderland of international arbitration no less than three
definitions of the word ‘international’ are to be found. These are set out below.
(i) The international character of the dispute
1. 65
The ICC, influenced by French law, adopted the nature of the dispute as its criterion for deciding whether or not an arbitration
was an ‘international arbitration’. At first, the ICC considered business disputes to be ‘international’ only if they involved
nationals of different countries, but it altered its Rules in 1927 to cover disputes that contained a ‘foreign element’, even if
the parties were nationals of the same country. An explanatory booklet issued by the ICC used to explain that:

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
[T]he international nature of the arbitration does not mean that the parties must necessarily be of different
nationalities. By virtue of its object, the contract can nevertheless extend beyond national borders, when for
example a contract is concluded between two nationals of the same State for performance in another country,
or when it is concluded between a State and a subsidiary of a foreign company doing business in that State. 51
(ii) Nationality of the parties
1. 66
The second approach is to focus attention not on the nature of the dispute but on the parties to it. This involves reviewing
the nationality, place of residence, or place of business of the parties to the arbitration agreement. It is an approach that was
adopted in the European Convention of 1961, 52  which although little used, contains several useful definitions, including a
definition of the agreements to which it applies as:
arbitration agreements concluded for the purpose of settling disputes arising from international trade between
physical or legal persons having, when concluding the agreement, their habitual place of residence or their
seat in different Contracting States [ … ] 53
1. 67
Switzerland is one of the states in which the nationality of the parties determines whether or not an arbitration is
‘international’. In Swiss law, an arbitration is ‘international’ if, at the time when the arbitration agreement was concluded,
at least one of the parties was not domiciled or habitually resident in Switzerland. 54  The ‘nationality’ test is also used in
part by the United States for the purposes of the New York Convention, with arbitration agreements between US citizens or
corporations excluded from the scope of the Convention unless their relationship ‘involves property located abroad, envisages
performance or enforcement abroad or has some reasonable relation with one or more foreign states.’ 55
(iii) The Model Law
1. 68
The lack of an internationally agreed definition of ‘international’ may create problems. Each state has its own test for
determining whether an arbitration award is ‘international’ or in the language of the New York Convention, ‘foreign’. The
Convention defines ‘foreign awards’ as awards made in the territory of a state other than that in which recognition and
enforcement are sought, which is clear enough; but the Convention then complicates matters by including in the category of
‘foreign awards’ those that are ‘not considered as domestic awards’ by the enforcement state. 56  In consequence, whilst the
state in which an award is made may consider that award to be ‘domestic’ (because it involves parties who are nationals of that
state), the enforcement state might consider it to be ‘foreign’ (for instance, because it involves the interests of international
trade).
1. 69
The Model Law, which was specifically designed to apply to international commercial arbitration, recognised that some
definition of the term ‘international’ was essential. The Model Law states, in Article 1(3):
An arbitration is international if:
 
(a)the parties to an arbitration agreement have, at the time of the conclusion of that agreement, their places
of business in different States; or
 
(b)one of the following places is situated outside the State in which the parties have their places of business:

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
(i)the place of arbitration if determined in, or pursuant to, the arbitration agreement;
 
(ii)any place where a substantial part of the obligations of the commercial relationship is to be
performed or the place with which the subject-matter of the dispute is most closely connected; or
 
(c)the parties have expressly agreed that the subject matter of the arbitration agreement relates to more
than one country.
1. 70
This definition combines the two criteria mentioned earlier and, for good measure, adds others, so that a dispute is
‘international’ if:
 
(i)the parties are of different nationalities—Article 1(3)(a);
 
(ii)the business is of an international character—Article 1(3)(b)(ii);
 
(iii)the parties have agreed that the subject matter of the arbitration agreement relates to more than one country—Article
1(3)(c); or
 
(iv)the agreed place of arbitration is outside the states in which the parties are situated—Article 1(3)(b)(i).
1. 71
For the purposes of this book, the authors adopt this wide definition of the term ‘international’. An arbitration is considered
to be ‘international’ (in the sense of the Model Law) if it involves parties of different nationalities, or if it takes place in a
country that is ‘foreign’ to the parties, or if it involves business of an international character, or if the parties have agreed
that it is international. 57  Nonetheless, a caveat must be entered to the effect that such arbitrations will not necessarily be
universally regarded as international. If a question arises as to whether or not a particular arbitration is ‘international’, the
answer will depend upon the provisions of the relevant national law.
(c) What is meant by the word ‘commercial’?
1. 72
It used to be customary to refer to the ‘commercial’ character of arbitrations, such as those to which much of this book is
devoted. This reflects the distinction made in some countries between contracts that are considered to be ‘commercial’ and
those that are not. This distinction was very important at a time when certain states only allowed disputes under ‘commercial’
contracts to be submitted to arbitration; and this is still the position in some states. 58  Under the law of that state, it would (for
example) be permissible to hold an arbitration between two business people over a contract made in the course of their business,
but not in respect of a contract for the allocation of property on the marriage of their children.
1. 73
The forerunner of the New York Convention, the 1923 Geneva Protocol, distinguished in Article 1 between ‘commercial matters’
and ‘any other matters capable of settlement by arbitration’. This distinction carried with it the implication that ‘commercial
matters’ would necessarily be capable of being settled (or resolved) by arbitration under the law of the state concerned, whilst
certain matters that the state considered to be ‘non-commercial’ could not be resolved in that manner.
1. 74
Further emphasis was added to the distinction between ‘commercial matters’ and ‘any other matters’ by the stipulation in the
Geneva Protocol that each contracting state was free to limit its obligations under the Protocol ‘to contracts that are considered
as commercial under its national law’. 59  This is the so-called ‘commercial reservation’. It remains important because the same
reservation by states is allowed under the New York Convention. 60
1. 75

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
The drafters of the Model Law considered defining the word ‘commercial’, 61  but found it too difficult. Instead, they settled
for a footnote saying:
The term ‘commercial’ should be given a wide interpretation so as to cover matters arising from all relationships
of a commercial nature, whether contractual or not. Relationships of a commercial nature include, but are
not limited to, the following transactions: any trade transaction for the supply or exchange of goods or
services; distribution agreement; commercial representation or agency; factoring; leasing; construction of
works; consulting; engineering; licensing; investment; financing; banking; insurance; exploitation agreement or
concession; joint venture and other forms of industrial or business co-operation; carriage of goods or passengers
by air, sea, rail or road.
The first four editions of this book were concerned principally with ‘commercial’ arbitrations, using ‘commercial’ in the
wide sense used in the Model Law. However, given the increased number and importance of investment disputes resolved by
arbitration, the authors deleted the reference to ‘commercial’ in subsequent editions. 62  In doing so, they noted that they were
following the practice of the arbitral community that distinguishes ‘commercial’ arbitration (which arises from a contractual
arbitration agreement) from ‘investment’ arbitration (which arises from consent in a bilateral or multilateral investment treaty)
although in most investment arbitrations, commercial interests are usually at stake.
(d) The legal rules applicable to international arbitration
1. 76
It would be reasonable to assume that an international arbitration is conducted under the relevant principles of international
law; and that the awards of international arbitral tribunals are based upon the substantive rules and principles of international
law. However, that is only the position for a small category of arbitrations. So far as any system of law is concerned, most
international arbitrations are governed procedurally by the laws of the country of the seat where the arbitration is deemed to
take place and substantively by the applicable national law selected by the parties in the underlying agreement.
1. 77
The limited category of international arbitrations governed by international law are, historically, inter-state disputes subject to
a specific arbitration agreement; and more recently, investment arbitrations conducted pursuant to state consent in a bilateral
or multilateral investment treaty.
1. 78
In the first category, states that were in dispute with each other, whether over frontiers or fishing rights, were historically
accustomed to refer their dispute to ad hoc tribunals composed (nominally, at least) of heads of state, 63  or to ‘mixed claims
commissions’ whose members were appointed by or on behalf of heads of state.
1. 79
The celebrated Alabama Claims arbitrations of 1872, which arose out of the US Civil War, marked a break with this practice. It
established a mechanism for appointing neutral arbitrators (one member of the tribunal being appointed by each party and the
‘neutral’ members being appointed by the King of Italy, the Emperor of Brazil, and the President of the Swiss Confederation). 64
1. 80
The role of international arbitration in the peaceful resolution of disputes between states was an important feature of the Peace
Conferences that took place at The Hague, on the initiative of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, in 1899 and 1907. The Hague
Convention of 1899 that resulted from the First Peace Conference proclaimed arbitration to be ‘the most effective and at the
same time the most equitable means of settling disputes which diplomacy has failed to settle’. This led to the establishment
at The Hague of the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) and then to the Permanent Court of International Justice (which
subsequently became the International Court of Justice). Disputes between states have been and continue to be referred to
arbitration at the PCA where there is a specific agreement for such reference between the affected states. 65

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
1. 81
However, except for these examples, the vast majority of international arbitrations take place between private parties and are
governed procedurally by the agreed rules of arbitration and the arbitration laws of the seat of the arbitration and substantively by
the system of applicable law agreed by the parties or, in default of agreement, determined by the tribunal. They are nevertheless
enforceable abroad pursuant to an international convention, the New York Convention. The hybrid nature of such cases made
them difficult to categorise. Sir Robert Jennings, former President of the International Court of Justice, noted this challenge in
his preface to the first edition of this book:
International commercial disputes do not fit into orthodox moulds of dispute procedures. They lie astraddle the
frontiers of foreign and domestic law and raise questions that do not fit into the categories of private international
law either. Not least they raise peculiar problems of enforcement.
(e) Is international arbitration autonomous?
1. 82
In contrast to litigants in a court of law, parties to an international arbitration enjoy a considerable degree of freedom in the way
in which that arbitration is conducted. They are free to select a sole arbitrator or the members of the arbitral tribunal; they are
free to select the place of arbitration and the rules that are to govern that arbitration; they are free to select the law that governs
the matters in issue and the procedures to be followed in considering those issues; and they are free to put an end to the entire
arbitral process if they reach a settlement during the course of the proceedings.
1. 83
Arbitration, whether international or domestic, is essentially a private system of justice depending on the consent of the parties. It
stands in contrast to the public system of a country’s courts of law. Its procedures are judicial or quasi-judicial, but its arbitrators
are private individuals. Unlike judges, international arbitrators do not have the powers and authority of the state behind them.
1. 84
There is much learned discussion in the literature, dating back over many years, as to the correct legal characterisation of this
essentially private system of justice. Initially, it was argued that international arbitration was ‘jurisdictional’ in nature. Even if
the parties to an arbitration were of different nationalities or had their places of business in different states, there would only be
one country that was the ‘seat’ of the arbitration. That arbitration would be subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of that country
and would be dependent on, and gain its authority from, that country’s national law. On this basis, an arbitration in London
between a German shipowner and a Dutch shipbuilder would be an English arbitration, subject to and dependent upon the law of
England; and the tribunal’s award would be an English award. It would not be a stateless, ‘international’ award; and if it became
necessary to enforce the award in another country, it would be enforceable as a ‘foreign’ award under the New York Convention,
the title of which states explicitly that it is concerned with the recognition and enforcement of ‘foreign arbitral awards’.
1. 85
This view, in which an award acquired the nationality of the country of the seat of the arbitration, did not commend itself to
more internationally minded lawyers such as Professor Phillippe Fouchard 66  who drew a clear distinction between domestic
arbitration and international arbitration. For Professor Fouchard, and for many others, international arbitration was a different
creature to the national or domestic variety. An international arbitration was based on the will of the parties (referred to in
French as ‘l’autonomie de la volonte’) who chose to arbitrate in a neutral country that generally had no connection with them
or with their dispute. There was thus no need to envisage a juridical link between that country and the award of the tribunal
that determined the dispute. Such awards should not be treated as national awards of the place of arbitration. Consistent with
the choice of the parties, they were not ‘national’ awards, but ‘international’ awards. To summarise, the argument was that the
place or seat of the arbitration and the national laws of that place were of no relevance, given:
 
(i)the participation of parties who had no national or other connection with the seat (or place) of the arbitration, which
could be anywhere;

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
 
(ii)the existence of rules of arbitration such as those of the ICC that made it possible for an arbitration to be conducted
from beginning to end without any reference to any national court or system of law; and
 
(iii)the existence of international treaties such as the New York Convention that provided for the recognition and
enforcement of arbitration agreements and arbitral awards;
In short, it was argued that international arbitration should properly be regarded as a wholly ‘autonomous’ and self-contained
institution. Its only point of contact with national systems of law would occur if and when a party sought recognition and
enforcement of the arbitral tribunal’s award.
1. 86
It is true to say that, in most cases, international arbitrations do proceed ‘autonomously’ from start to finish, as a driverless car is
intended to do. There is no need for a touch on the driving wheel or the brake. There is no need for a reference to a court of law,
whether on the challenge of an arbitrator, an application for interim relief, or indeed any other interlocutory matter. In practice,
the relevant rules of arbitration are usually adequate to cover such situations, without assistance or intervention from the courts.
1. 87
One of the high points in the argument for the autonomy of international arbitration came with the 2007 Putrabali decision
of the French Court of Cassation. This decision and its successors are considered more fully in Chapter 3 but put briefly, the
French court held that an international arbitral award set aside by the English High Court could nevertheless be enforced in
France. In the view of the French court, the award was not anchored to any particular national legal order, including that of the
seat of the arbitration. The court said: ‘[A]n international arbitral award, which does not belong to any state legal system, is a
decision of international justice, whose validity must be ascertained with regard to the applicable rules of the country where
its recognition and enforcement are sought’. 67
1. 88
This decision has been criticised by many lawyers and commentators who regard any arbitration, whether national or
international, as having a necessary juridical connection with the courts of the seat of that arbitration. However, whilst an
enforcing court will usually not enforce an award ‘set aside’ by the courts of the place of arbitration when asked to do so, 68  it
retains a discretion to do so under the New York Convention since the grounds for refusing enforcement under the New York
Convention (and the Model Law) are not mandatory. 69
1. 89
Leaving aside these arguments, there is a very real concern that international arbitration, which already enjoys considerably
freedom under most national laws, should be careful not to over-reach itself by asserting complete autonomy. The point was
strongly made by Lord Mance, a former judge of the UK Supreme Court when he said: 70
Arbitration already offers those engaging in it very substantial autonomy. Siren calls for complete or yet further
autonomy should be viewed with scepticism. We—judges, arbitrators and lawyers—are engaged in a common
exercise, the administration of justice for the benefit of litigants and society. A degree of order, coordination and
interdependence is necessary and desirable if this exercise is to be conducted efficiently and economically in a
globalised world.
1. 90
In his judgment in Bank Mellatt v Hellinki Teckniki, Sir Michael Kerr also warned against arbitration as an entirely autonomous
process:
Despite suggestions to the contrary by some learned writers under other systems, our jurisdiction does not
recognise the concept of arbitral procedures floating in the transnational firmament, unconnected with any system
of law.
This was a statement of the position in English law, but it is a position generally adopted by many other legal systems that accept
that an international arbitration is anchored to the law of the country which (actually or notionally) is the place or ‘seat’ of the

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
arbitration; and that there is a juridical link between an international arbitration and the law of that seat. The need for that link
becomes apparent when issues such as the review of the award fall to be considered.
1. 91
The proponents of arbitration without nationality (‘delocalised’ arbitration) dream of a world in which there is no intervention,
or at most very limited intervention, by national courts in international arbitration. 71  The problem remains that there is no
international court of arbitration with the power to enforce agreements to arbitrate or the orders of arbitral tribunals or arbitral
awards themselves. If enforcement is needed, it can only come from national courts of law possessed of powers of punishment
and sanction that are not available to arbitrators or arbitral institutions.
(f) National law and international conventions
1. 92
An understanding of the interplay between the private arbitral process and the different national systems of law that may impinge
upon that process is fundamental to a proper understanding of international arbitration. This interplay may take place at almost
any phase of the arbitral process. For example, it may be necessary at the outset of an arbitration for the claimant to ask the
relevant national (or local) court to enforce an agreement to arbitrate which the adverse party is seeking to circumvent by
commencing court proceedings; or it may be necessary to ask the relevant court to appoint the arbitral tribunal (if this cannot
be done under the arbitration agreement). During the course of the arbitration, it may become necessary for a party to apply to
the relevant court for interim measures that it is empowered to give, for example the blocking of a bank account or the seizure
of assets to prevent their disappearance.
1. 93
When an award has been made, the losing party may seek to challenge it before the courts of the seat of the arbitration on
the basis that the arbitral tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction, failed to respect due process, or on some other legally recognised
ground. If that challenge succeeds, the award will either be amended or set aside completely. 72  By contrast, the winning party
may need to apply to a national court for recognition and enforcement of the award 73  in a state (or states) in which the losing
party has (or is believed to have) assets that can be sequestrated.
1. 94
States that recognise international arbitration as a valid method of resolving international disputes are generally ready to give
their assistance to the arbitral process. Indeed, in many cases, they are bound to do so by the international conventions to which
they are parties. In return, it is to be expected that they will seek to exercise a measure of control over the arbitral process. Such
control is usually exercised on a territorial basis: first, over arbitrations conducted in the territory of the state concerned and
secondly, over awards brought into the territory of the state concerned for the purpose of recognition and enforcement.
1. 95
As to the first proposition, it would be unusual for a state to support arbitral tribunals operating within its jurisdiction without
claiming some degree of control over the conduct of those arbitral tribunals—if only to ensure that minimum standards of justice
are met, particularly in procedural matters. 74
1. 96
As to the second proposition, it is generally accepted that states that may be called upon to recognise and enforce a foreign
arbitral award are entitled to ensure that minimum standards of due process have been observed in the making of that award, that
the subject matter of the award is ‘arbitrable’ in terms of their own laws, and that the award itself does not offend public policy. 75
1. 97
The dependence of the international arbitral process upon national systems of law should be recognised, but not exaggerated.
Across the world, there is a growing harmonisation of the national laws that govern both the conduct of international arbitrations,
and the recognition and enforcement of international awards. This process of harmonisation was inspired by the New York
Convention and was then given fresh impetus by the Model Law. Additionally, the importance of international arbitration, in

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
terms both of its contribution to global trade and of the economic benefit that arbitrations can bring to the host country, is
increasingly recognised, with new arbitration centres being established in different parts of the world. Some may have only a
nominal existence but taken as a whole they represent a potential source of revenue (and perhaps of prestige) to a country. 76
(g) The role of international conventions and the Model Law
1. 98
The most effective method of creating a ‘universal’ system of law governing international arbitration has been through
international conventions (and, more recently, through the Model Law). International conventions have helped to link national
systems of law into a network of laws that, while they may differ in their wording, have as their common objective the
international enforcement of arbitration agreements and of arbitral awards.
1. 99
The first such convention, in modern times, was the Montevideo Convention. 77  This was established in 1889 and provided for
the recognition and enforcement of arbitration agreements between certain Latin American states. 78  It was therefore essentially
a regional convention. The first modern and genuinely international convention was the 1923 Geneva Protocol, which was
drawn up on the initiative of the ICC and under the auspices of the League of Nations. It was quickly followed by the Geneva
Convention of 1927.
(i) The Geneva Protocol of 1923
1. 100
The 1923 Geneva Protocol was concerned with both arbitration clauses and arbitral awards. Its main objective was to ensure
that arbitration clauses were enforceable internationally, so that parties to an arbitration agreement could be compelled to
resolve their dispute by arbitration rather than through the courts. This was done by requiring national courts to refuse to
entertain legal proceedings brought in breach of an agreement to arbitrate. The second and subsidiary objective of the 1923
Geneva Protocol was to ensure that arbitration awards made pursuant to such arbitration agreements would be enforced in
the territory of the states in which they were made.
1. 101
The Geneva Protocol is now a spent force. It is still worthy of note, however, since the enforcement of arbitration agreements
remains an objective of both the New York Convention and the Model Law.
(ii) The Geneva Convention of 1927
1. 102
The 1927 Geneva Convention 79  was intended to widen the scope of the Geneva Protocol by providing for the recognition
and enforcement of Protocol awards made within the territory of any of the contracting states (and not merely within the
territory of the state in which the award was made). 80  However, a party seeking enforcement of an award under the 1927
Geneva Convention had to prove the conditions necessary for enforcement. This led to what became known as the problem of
‘double exequatur’. To show that the award had become final in its country of origin, the successful party was often obliged
(i) to seek a declaration (an ‘exequatur’) in the courts of the country in which the arbitration took place to the effect that
the award was enforceable in that country before (ii) it could go ahead and enforce the award (a second exequatur) in the
courts of the place of enforcement.

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
(iii) The New York Convention of 1958
1. 103
The New York Convention is one of the cornerstones of international arbitration. 81  It has been described as ‘the single most
important pillar on which the edifice of international arbitration rests’, 82  and one that ‘perhaps could lay claim to be the most
effective instance of international legislation in the entire history of commercial law’. 83  Indeed, it is principally because
of the New York Convention that international arbitration has become the established method of resolving international
disputes. The major trading nations of the world have become parties to the New York Convention. At the time of writing,
the Convention has 168 state parties on every continent.
1. 104
The New York Convention provides a simpler and more effective method of obtaining recognition and enforcement of foreign
arbitral awards than was available under the 1927 Geneva Convention. 84  The title of the New York Convention suggests that
it is concerned only with the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards, but this is misleading. The Convention
is also concerned with the recognition of arbitration agreements.
1. 105
In order to enforce arbitration agreements, the New York Convention adopts the technique found in the 1923 Geneva Protocol.
The courts of contracting states are required to refuse to allow a case to proceed if the dispute in question is subject to an
arbitration agreement and raised by any party to that agreement. 85
1. 106
Courts of different countries have differed (and continue to differ) in their interpretation of the New York Convention. 86
However, even if it has provisions that are obsolete, 87  it has stood the test of time and remains a cornerstone of international
arbitration.
(iv) Conventions After 1958
1. 107
The New York Convention 88  represents a vital achievement in the shaping of modern international arbitration. No convention
since 1958 has had the same impact. There are, however, other treaties and conventions, which may enable recognition and
enforcement of arbitral awards in appropriate cases including the 1966 ICSID Convention for arbitrations that take place
under the auspices of the ICSID system. These conventions are discussed in Chapter 11 and ICSID arbitration in Chapter 8.
(v) Investment treaties
1. 108
In the context of international treaties and conventions, a brief mention should be made of investment treaties. Historically,
states doing business with each other often entered into ‘treaties of friendship, commerce, and navigation’. In order to
encourage trade and investment, the states concerned would grant each other favourable trading conditions and agree that
any (inter-state) disputes would be resolved by arbitration. Such treaties have now given way to investment treaties, either
bilateral (BITs) or multilateral (MITs), or as investment chapters in free trade agreements. 89  The Energy Treaty Charter, for
example, provides for disputes between a contracting state and the energy investor of another contracting state to be referred to
international arbitration. 90  Free trade agreements, such as the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA) (which
has replaced the North American Free Trade Agreement or NAFTA) also contain similar investor protection and arbitration
clauses.

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
(vi) The Model Law
1. 109
The Model Law began with a proposal to reform the New York Convention. This led to a report from UNCITRAL 91  to the
effect that harmonisation of the arbitration laws of the different countries of the world could be achieved more effectively by
a model or uniform law. The final text of the Model Law was adopted by resolution of UNCITRAL at its session in Vienna
in June 1985, as a law to govern international commercial arbitration. A recommendation of the General Assembly of the
United Nations commending the Model Law to member states was adopted in December 1985. 92
1. 110
The Model Law has been a major success. The text goes through the arbitral process from beginning to end in a simple and
readily understandable form. It is a text that many states have adopted as their own law, either as it stands or with minor
changes. So far eighty-five states have adopted legislation based on the Model Law, with some states choosing to modernise
their laws on arbitration without adopting the Model Law, whilst being careful to follow its format and to have close regard
to its provisions. 93
1. 111
It may be said that if the New York Convention put international arbitration on the world stage, it was the Model Law that
made it a star, with appearances in states across the world. Even so, the Model Law, which was enacted in 1985, has been
overtaken by a fast-moving world in at least two respects. The first was the requirement for an arbitration agreement to be
in writing, which was outdated; the second centred on the provisions governing the power of an arbitral tribunal to order
interim measures of relief. To address these concerns, UNCITRAL established a working group in 2000 to consider revisions
to the Model Law. This working group produced proposals that were adopted as revisions to the Model Law and approved
by the United Nations in December 2006. 94
Footnotes
50
Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking Glass (Macmillan & Co, 1872), ch. 6.
51
ICC, ‘The International Solution to International Business Disputes: ICC Arbitration’, ICC Publication No. 301 (ICC,
1977), p. 19. (This useful booklet is no longer in print.)
52
European Convention on International Commercial Arbitration, signed at Geneva on 21 April 1961: United Nations
Treaty Series (1963–64), Vol. 484, p. 364, No. 7041.
53
European Convention of 1961, Art. I(1)(a) (emphasis added).
54
See the Swiss Private International Law Act 1987, as amended in 2021, Ch. 12, Art. 176(1).
55
US Code, Title 9 (‘Arbitration’) § 202.
56
New York Convention, Art. 1(1).
57
Spain is one of the countries that has adopted this wide definition in the Spanish Arbitration Act 2003, as amended by
the Arbitration Amendment Act 2011, s. 3.
58
For example, China is one major state that adopted the ‘commercial reservation’ when it ratified the New York
Convention in 1987, and in India, for instance, an ‘international commercial arbitration’ is defined to mean an arbitration
relating to legal relationships that are consideredArbitration and Conciliation Act to be commercial under the law in
force in India: Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996, s. 2(1)(f).
59
Geneva Protocol of 1923, Art. 1.
60
New York Convention, Art. I(3). It may be important to know whether the legal relationship out of which the arbitration
arose was or was not a commercial relationship. If, e.g., it becomes necessary to seek recognition or enforcement of a
foreign arbitral award in a state that has adhered to the New York Convention but has entered the commercial reservation,
it will be necessary to look at the law of the state concerned to see what definition it adopts of the term ‘commercial’.
61
Which neither the Geneva Protocol nor the New York Convention had done.

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
62
The definition appears as a footnote to Art. 1(1), which states that the Model Law applies to ‘international commercial
arbitration’. It is interesting to see that the Model Law includes ‘investment’ within the definition of the term
‘commercial’, since in practice a separate regime for investment disputes has tended to develop, particularly where a
state or state entity is concerned. See Chapter 8 on investment arbitration.
63
For instance, President Grant of the United States was sole arbitrator in the Bulama Island case and Queen Victoria
was sole arbitrator in a dispute between France and Mexico: see Simpson and Fox, International Arbitration (Stevens
& Sons Limited, 1969), pp. 1–41.
64
The basis of the claims was an alleged breach of the international laws on neutrality in time of war by the British
government, which had failed to prevent the Alabama and her supply ship Georgia (built in British yards), from setting
sail to join the Confederacy during the US civil war. The British government was ordered to pay compensation in the
sum of $15.5 million, a considerable amount at that time: see Simpson and Fox, International Arbitration (Stevens &
Sons Limited, 1959), p. 8; Brownlie, Principles of Public International Law (7th edn, Oxford University Press), p. 702,
fn. 6. Brownlie notes that: ‘The popularity of arbitration increased considerably after the successful Alabama Claims
arbitration of 1872 between the United States and Great Britain’ (ibid., at p. 702).
65
The PCA also administers disputes involving private parties. The first such arbitration was Radio Corporation of
America v China (1941) 8 ILR 26; for current cases see the official PCA website.
66
See in particular Fouchard, L’Arbitrage Commerciale International (Dalloz, 1965).
67
Societe PT Putrabali Adyamulia v Societe Rena Holding et Societe Mnugotia Est Epices [2007] Rev Arb 507, at 514.
68
See New York Convention, Art. V.1(e).
69
See the discussion of the New York Convention, Art. V.1(e) and the Model Law, Art. 36(1)(v) in Chapters 10 and 11.
70
Mance, ‘Arbitration: A Law unto Itself?’ (2016) 32 Arb Intl 223.
71
We return to this discussion in Chapter 3. For a helpful, concise, and informative introduction to the topic see Lew,
‘Achieving the dream: Autonomous arbitration’, in Lew and Mistelis (eds) Arbitration Insights: Twenty Years of the
Annual Lecture of the School of Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2007), pp. 454–485. For a note emphasising the
importance of the seat of arbitration ‘at all stages of an arbitration’s life-span’ see, for instance, Ferrari, ‘Plures leges
faciunt arbitrum’ (2012) 37(3) Arb Intl 579–599, at 596.
72
See Chapter 10.
73
See Chapter 11.
74
See Kerr, ‘Arbitration and the courts: The UNCITRAL Model Law’ (1984) 50 Arbitration 3, at 14:
[T]here is virtually no body, tribunal, authority or individual in this country whose acts or decisions give
rise to binding legal consequences for others, but who are altogether immune from judicial review in
the event of improper conduct, breaches of the principles of natural justice, or decisions which clearly
transcend any standard of objective reasonableness.
75
For further discussion of ‘arbitrability’ and public policy, see Chapter 2.
76
Mustill, ‘The history of international commercial arbitration: A sketch’, in Newman and Hill (eds) The Leading
Arbitrators’ Guide to International Arbitration (2nd edn, JurisNet, 2008), p. 17: ‘National governments have also sought
to gain economic advantage from the promotion of local arbitration by backing the establishment of arbitration or dispute
resolution centres, the idea being that if there is in one’s own country a focus of intellectual and practical activity in this
field, with facilities for the conduct and study of arbitrations, contracting parties will choose to conclude agreements
for arbitration there [ … ].’
77
Treaty concerning the Union of South American States in respect of Procedural Law, signed at Montevideo on 11 January
1889. The Treaty is published, in an English translation, in United Nations, Register of Texts of Conventions and Other
Instruments Concerning International Trade Law, Vol. II (UN, 1973), p. 5.
78
Montevideo Convention, Arts 5–7.
79
Convention for the Execution of Foreign Arbitral Awards, signed at Geneva on 26 September 1927.
80
The states that have adhered to the Geneva Convention are substantially those that adhered to the Geneva Protocol (with
some notable omissions, such as Brazil, Norway, and Poland).
81
In 1953, the ICC proposed a new treaty to govern international arbitration. The draft document produced by the ICC
gave an early indication of the debate that has continued ever since, concerning the feasibility of a truly international
award. The ICC’s proposal for such an award, which would not be subject to control by the law of the place in which
it was made, was unacceptable to the majority of states. It has also proved to be equally unacceptable in more modern
times, when the Model Law was formulated.

Section C. - The Legal Framework of International Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
82
Wetter, ‘The present status of the International Court of Arbitration of the ICC: An appraisal’ (1990) 1 Am Rev Intl
Arb 91, at 93.
83
Mustill, ‘Arbitration: History and background’ (1989) 6 J Intl Arb 43, at 49. See also Schwebel, ‘A celebration of the
United Nations’ New York Convention’ (1996) 12 Arb Intl 83.
84
The New York Convention replaces the 1923 Geneva Protocol and the 1927 Geneva Convention as between states that
are parties to both: see Art. VII(2).
85
New York Convention, Art. 11(3).
86
The ICCA’s Yearbook of Commercial Arbitration (YBCA) reports, each year, court decisions made in different countries
on the interpretation and application of the New York Convention, translated into English where necessary.
87
Such as in the ‘writing requirement’, discussed in Chapter 2.
88
The recognition and enforcement of awards under the New York Convention, and the grounds for refusal of such
recognition and enforcement, are discussed in Chapters 10 and 11.
89
According to UNCTAD, there are now more than 2,850 BITs and more than 400 ‘other’ international investment
agreements (such as free trade agreements, economic partnership agreements, or framework agreements with an
investment element): available online at https://investmentpolicy.unctad.org/international-investment-agreements.
90
See, e.g., Huber, ‘Investment arbitration and the Energy Charter Treaties’ (2010) 1(1) J Intl Disp Settlement 153–190.
91
UNCITRAL, Study on the Application and Interpretation of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards, UN Doc A/CN9/168 (UN, 1958).
92
For a full account of the origins and aims of the Model Law, see the second edition of this book, pp. 508ff.
93
The advisory committee established in the United Kingdom to report on the Bill that became the English Arbitration Act
1996 stated in Departmental Advisory Committee on Arbitration Law, Report on the Arbitration Bill (HMSO, 1996)
(known as the ‘DAC Report’), at para. 4: ‘[a]t every stage in preparing a new draft Bill, very close regard was paid
to the Model Law, and it will be seen that both the structure and the content of the July draft bill, and the final bill,
owe much to this model.’
94
Resolution 61/33 adopted by the General Assembly on 4 December 2006, available at https:/undocs.org/en/A/Res/61/33.
(Discussion of relevant provisions of the Model law, including the provisions governing interim relief, takes place in
the following chapters of this book.)
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
