Section B. - At the Beginning of the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638645 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section B. - At the Beginning of the Arbitration
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 7 - Role of National Courts During the Proceedings
Section B. - At the Beginning of the Arbitration
7. 09
There are at least three situations in which the intervention of the court may be necessary at the beginning of the arbitral process:
 
•the enforcement of the arbitration agreement;
 
•the establishment of the tribunal; and
 
•challenges to jurisdiction.
(a) The enforcement of the arbitration agreement
7. 10
An agreement to arbitrate confers two types of obligations: first, a positive obligation to arbitrate disputes that arise between
the parties cooperatively and in good faith; and second, a negative obligation to refrain from litigating arbitrable disputes. In
respect of the former, US courts order recalcitrant parties to arbitration agreements to participate in arbitration proceedings. 17
As one senior arbitrator has observed, the value of such orders lies in foreclosing the ability of the would-be non-participating
party to ‘decide for tactical reasons, which may assist in resisting enforcement, to refuse to participate in the arbitration despite
the arbitration agreement’. 18
7. 11
It would no doubt have been possible to provide in the New York Convention for such positive enforcement of an agreement to
arbitrate. Instead, the Convention relies on the negative obligation. If a national court is seized of an action in respect of a claim
that the parties have agreed to refer to arbitration, the court should order the matter to go to arbitration, unless it finds that the
agreement to arbitrate was null and void, inoperative, or incapable of being performed. 19  If a party to an arbitration agreement
decides to issue proceedings in a court of law, rather than to take the dispute to arbitration, and the respondent acquiesces, then
the arbitration agreement will be deemed to have been waived and the court action will proceed. However, a respondent that has
entered into an arbitration agreement will usually wish to have the dispute decided by arbitrators rather than by a national court.
7. 12
The principal remedy for breach of the negative obligation is almost universally either a mandatory stay or the dismissal for
lack of jurisdiction of the litigation brought before the national court in breach of the arbitration agreement.
7. 13
In addition, where litigation has been brought or is threatened before the courts of another jurisdiction, in breach of an arbitration
agreement, that litigation may be suspended or prevented by enforcing the negative obligation through an anti-suit injunction,
viewed as ‘one of the most controversial and contested remedies in the court’s armoury’. 20  Raphael defines an anti-suit
injunction as:
an order of the court requiring the injunction defendant not to commence, or to cease to pursue, or not to advance
particular claims within, or to take steps to terminate or suspend, court or arbitration proceedings in a foreign

Section B. - At the Beginning of the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638645 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
country [ … ] The order is addressed to, and binds, the actual or potential litigant in the other proceedings, and
is not addressed to, and has no effect on, the other court. 21
7. 14
Anti-suit injunctions are generally available in common law jurisdictions but not in civil law systems, and under certain laws
may be granted by a tribunal as well as by the courts. 22  But as noted in Chapter 5, following Allianz SpA and anor v West
Tankers Inc., courts in European Union (EU) member states are not permitted to issue anti-suit injunctions against proceedings
in other member states, even if those proceedings were brought in violation of a valid arbitration agreement.
(b) Establishing the arbitral tribunal
7. 15
If (i) the parties have failed to make adequate provision for the constitution of an arbitral tribunal, or (ii) the agreed appointment
procedure is not successfully carried out, and there is no fallback mechanism in the applicable institutional or other rules (such as
the UNCITRAL Rules), then the assistance of a national court may be required to complete the constitution of the arbitral tribunal
—for instance, by appointing the presiding arbitrator, if there is no agreement between the parties as to a suitable appointment.
7. 16
As discussed in Chapter 4, the national court may also be asked to decide on a challenge to the independence or impartiality
of an arbitrator, and to remove that arbitrator if the challenge is successful. 23  However, the power of removal is generally
exercised sparingly by national courts. 24
(c) Challenges to jurisdiction
7. 17
If any issue is raised as to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal, it will generally (although not always) be made at the beginning
of the arbitration. If the objection is successful, the arbitration will be terminated. The issue of challenges to jurisdiction is one
of growing importance and is dealt with in Chapter 5. The only point that should be made here, in the context of the relationship
between national courts and arbitral tribunals, is that it is recognised in the Model Law (and in many national systems of law)
that whilst any challenge to the jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal may be dealt with initially by the tribunal itself, the final
decision on jurisdiction rests with the relevant national court. 25  This is either the court at the seat of the arbitration, or the court
of the state(s) in which recognition and enforcement of the arbitral award is sought.
Footnotes
17
Pursuant to the Federal Arbitration Act, ss. 4, 206, and 303.
18
Lew, ‘Does national court involvement undermine the international arbitration processes?’ (2009) 24(3) Am Uni Intl
Law Rev 489, at 527.
19
New York Convention, Art. II(3).
20
Raphael, The Anti-Suit Injunction (Oxford University Press, 2008), para. 1.01.
21
Ibid., at para. 1.05.
22
See Steamship Mutual Underwriting Association (Bermuda) Ltd v Sulpicio Lines Inc [2008] EWHC 914 (Comm), at
[33], confirming arbitral tribunals’ competence to issue anti-suit injunctions under English law.
23
Paragraphs 4.115ff.

Section B. - At the Beginning of the Arbitration, UKBC-REDFERN 530638645 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
24
Lew, Mistelis, and Kroll, Comparative International Commercial Arbitration (Kluwer Law International, 2003), para.
15-37.
25
Model Law, Art. 16(3). Unusually, English (Arbitration Act 1996, s. 32) and German law (ZPO, s. 1032(2)) both provide
for an action to be brought before the courts to determine preliminary points of jurisdiction prior to the tribunal’s
jurisdictional award, subject to narrow limits.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
