Appendix C - Convention on the Settlement of Investment..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Appendix C - Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States 1965
(‘Washington Convention’) (excerpts)
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Appendix C - Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States 1965
(‘Washington Convention’) (excerpts)
Chapter I. International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
[ … ]
Section 4 The Panels
[ … ]
Article 14
(1) Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high moral character and recognized competence
in the fields of law, commerce, industry or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment.
Competence in the field of law shall be of particular importance in the case of persons on the Panel of Arbitrators.
(2) The Chairman, in designating persons to serve on the Panels, shall in addition pay due regard to the importance of
assuring representation on the Panels of the principal legal systems of the world and of the main forms of economic
activity.
[ … ]
Chapter II. Jurisdiction of the Centre
Article 25
(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a
Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that
State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.
(2) ‘National of another Contracting State’ means:
 
(a) any natural person who had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State party to the
dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration
as well as on the date on which the request was registered pursuant to paragraph (3) of Article 28 or
paragraph (3) of Article 36, but does not include any person who on either date also had the nationality
of the Contracting State party to the dispute; and

Appendix C - Convention on the Settlement of Investment..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State party to the
dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration
and any juridical person which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute on that
date and which, because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be treated as a national of
another Contracting State for the purposes of this Convention.
(3) Consent by a constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State shall require the approval of that State
unless that State notifies the Centre that no such approval is required.
(4) Any Contracting State may, at the time of ratification, acceptance or approval of this Convention or at any time
thereafter, notify the Centre of the class or classes of disputes which it would or would not consider submitting to the
jurisdiction of the Centre. The Secretary-General shall forthwith transmit such notification to all Contracting States.
Such notification shall not constitute the consent required by paragraph (1).
Article 26
Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such
arbitration to the exclusion of any other remedy. A Contracting State may require the exhaustion of local administrative
or judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitration under this Convention.
Article 27
(1) No Contracting State shall give diplomatic protection, or bring an international claim, in respect of a dispute which
one of its nationals and another Contracting State shall have consented to submit or shall have submitted to arbitration
under this Convention, unless such other Contracting State shall have failed to abide by and comply with the award
rendered in such dispute.
(2) Diplomatic protection, for the purposes of paragraph (1), shall not include informal diplomatic exchanges for the
sole purpose of facilitating a settlement of the dispute.
[ … ]
Chapter IV. Arbitration
[ … ]
Section 2 Constitution of the Tribunal
[ … ]
Article 39
The majority of the arbitrators shall be nationals of States other than the Contracting State party to the dispute and
the Contracting State whose national is a party to the dispute; provided, however, that the foregoing provisions of
this Article shall not apply if the sole arbitrator or each individual member of the Tribunal has been appointed by
agreement of the parties.
Article 40

Appendix C - Convention on the Settlement of Investment..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
(1) Arbitrators may be appointed from outside the Panel of Arbitrators, except in the case of appointments by the
Chairman pursuant to Article 38.
(2) Arbitrators appointed from outside the Panel of Arbitrators shall possess the qualities stated in paragraph (1) of
Article 14.
Section 3 Powers and Functions of the Tribunal
[ … ]
Article 42
(1) The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties. In the
absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (including
its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law as may be applicable.
(2) The Tribunal may not bring in a finding of non liquet on the ground of silence or obscurity of the law.
(3) The provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not prejudice the power of the Tribunal to decide a dispute ex aequo
et bono if the parties so agree.
[ … ]
Article 47
Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, recommend
any provisional measures which should be taken to preserve the respective rights of either party.
[ … ]
Section 5 Interpretation, Revision and Annulment of the Award
Article 50
(1) If any dispute shall arise between the parties as to the meaning or scope of an award, either party may request
interpretation of the award by an application in writing addressed to the Secretary-General.
(2) The request shall, if possible, be submitted to the Tribunal which rendered the award. If this shall not be possible,
a new Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Section 2 of this Chapter. The Tribunal may, if it considers
that the circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the award pending its decision.
Article 51
(1) Either party may request revision of the award by an application in writing addressed to the Secretary-General
on the ground of discovery of some fact of such a nature as decisively to affect the award, provided that when the
award was rendered that fact was unknown to the Tribunal and to the applicant and that the applicant’s ignorance of
that fact was not due to negligence.

Appendix C - Convention on the Settlement of Investment..., UKBC-REDFERN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
(2) The application shall be made within 90 days after the discovery of such fact and in any event within three years
after the date on which the award was rendered.
(3) The request shall, if possible, be submitted to the Tribunal which rendered the award. If this shall not be possible,
a new Tribunal shall be constituted in accordance with Section 2 of this Chapter.
(4) The Tribunal may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the award pending its
decision. If the applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement shall be stayed
provisionally until the Tribunal rules on such request.
Article 52
(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in writing addressed to the Secretary-General
on one or more of the following grounds:
 
(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;
 
(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;
 
(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;
 
(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure; or
 
(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.
(2) The application shall be made within 120 days after the date on which the award was rendered except that when
annulment is requested on the ground of corruption such application shall be made within 120 days after discovery
of the corruption and in any event within three years after the date on which the award was rendered.
(3) On receipt of the request the Chairman shall forthwith appoint from the Panel of Arbitrators an ad hoc Committee
of three persons. None of the members of the Committee shall have been a member of the Tribunal which rendered
the award, shall be of the same nationality as any such member, shall be a national of the State party to the dispute or
of the State whose national is a party to the dispute, shall have been designated to the Panel of Arbitrators by either of
those States, or shall have acted as a conciliator in the same dispute. The Committee shall have the authority to annul
the award or any part thereof on any of the grounds set forth in paragraph (1).
(4) The provisions of Articles 41-45, 48, 49, 53 and 54, and of Chapters VI and VII shall apply mutatis mutandis to
proceedings before the Committee.
(5) The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the award pending its
decision. If the applicant requests a stay of enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement shall be stayed
provisionally until the Committee rules on such request.
(6) If the award is annulled the dispute shall, at the request of either party, be submitted to a new Tribunal constituted
in accordance with Section 2 of this Chapter.
[ … ]
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
