Content of the Application, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406943 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Content of the Application
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Content of the Application
29-21
Article 1(3) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules describes the content of the Application for Emergency Measures, in its sub-
paragraphs (a) through (i):
 
(a)“the name in full, description, address and other contact details of each of the parties”—This is the same type of
information as required for a Request for Arbitration pursuant to art.4(3)(a) of the Rules.
 
(b)“the name in full, address and other contact details of any person(s) representing the applicant”—This is the same type
of information as required for a Request for Arbitration pursuant to art.4(3)(b) of the Rules.
 
(c)“a description of the circumstances giving rise to the Application and of the underlying dispute referred or to be referred
to arbitration”—The description must cover two different points: first, it should provide an explanation of the reasons why
the applicant is seeking Emergency Measures. Second, it should provide a description of the underlying dispute between
the parties. If at the time of the Application a Request for Arbitration has already been filed, it will be sufficient to refer
to the description of the dispute made therein. 548  In that case, but also when the Request for Arbitration has not yet been
filed, the dispute between the parties must be described in at least a summary fashion with reference in particular to the
reasons for the application.
 
(d)“A statement of the Emergency Measures sought”—This refers to the provisional relief the applicant is seeking to obtain
from the Emergency Arbitrator.
 
(e)“The reasons why the applicant needs urgent interim or conservatory measures that cannot await the constitution of an
arbitral Tribunal”—This requirement reflects the very definition of Emergency Measures in art.29(1).
 
(f)“any relevant agreements and, in particular, the arbitration agreement”—Submitting the arbitration agreement is
important to establish and prove the signatory requirement under art.29(5), and to show that none of the exclusionary
grounds of art.29(6) exists. Other relevant agreements may be those evidencing, for instance, the fact that a party has
become a successor to a signatory of the arbitration agreement.
 
(g)“any agreement as to the place of the arbitration, the applicable rules of law or the language of the arbitration”—
This information will normally be contained in the arbitration agreement. It may facilitate the President’s choice of an
Emergency Arbitrator if the place of arbitration, the law applicable to the contract and the language of the arbitration is
highlighted in the Application. Where the arbitration agreement is silent in respect to the place of arbitration, the President
will have to fix the place of the emergency arbitrator proceedings, art.(1) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. 549  Nothing
prevents the applicant from making proposals and explaining the reasons behind such proposals. 550
 
(h)“proof of payment of the amount referred to in Article 7(1) of this Appendix”—The applicant must furnish proof of
payment of the sum of US$40,000, which is meant to cover the costs of the Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings, art.7(1)
of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. Proof of payment can be in the form of payment itself, e.g. a cheque made out to the
order of the ICC. The ICC will not take payments in cash for such amount. A copy of a bank wire transfer to the ICC’s
account will normally constitute sufficient proof of payment.
—The Emergency Arbitrator Rules do not say expressly what will happen if the applicant fails to provide (sufficient)
proof of payment. If the filing fee required for a Request for Arbitration is not paid, the Secretariat may fix a time limit

Content of the Application, UKBC-ICCARBN 474406943 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
for the claimant to do so, art.4(4), second paragraph of the Rules. Unless it has received the filing fee, it will not notify
the Request for Arbitration. Undoubtedly, in case of an Application, the Secretariat is not required to take action prior to
having received (sufficient) proof of payment.
 
(i)“any Request for Arbitration and any other submissions in connection with the underlying dispute, which have been filed
with the Secretariat by any of the parties to the emergency arbitrator proceedings prior to the making of the Application”—
If a Request for Arbitration has been filed, this information must be mentioned in the Application, and a copy of the Request
supplied. It is not necessarily the applicant that will have filed a Request for Arbitration with the ICC; it may be any other
party covered by the Application.
—Article 1(3)(i) Emergency Arbitrator Rules mentions also “any other submission in connection with the underlying
dispute”. Since such other submission will have to be filed with the Secretariat, an applicant will rarely be in a situation
where such other submissions could be filed. 551  It could be, for instance, the Answer to the Request for Arbitration, or
simply a letter sent by the respondent to the Secretariat upon receipt of the Request for Arbitration.
29-22
The final paragraph of art.1(3) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules contains a catch-all clause inviting the applicant to provide
“such other documents or information as the applicant considers appropriate or as may contribute to the efficient examination
of the Application”. Similar language can be found in the last paragraph of arts 4(3) and 5(1) of the Rules for the Request for
Arbitration and Answer respectively. The applicant might already have filed a request for interim relief before a state court, and
might have filed for interim relief. This could further justify the need to obtain urgent interim relief under the ICC Rules.
Footnotes
548
It follows from art.29(1) second sentence that the filing of a Request for Arbitration is not necessary at the time of filing
an Application.
549
See para.29-49 and following.
550
See para.29-54 regarding the criteria to be taken into account by the ICC Court’s President when fixing the place of
Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings.
551
2012 Secretariat’s Guide, para.3-1077.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
