Consequences of Admissibility Check by ICC Court President, UKBC-ICCARBN...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Consequences of Admissibility Check by ICC Court President
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
Consequences of Admissibility Check by ICC Court President
29-31
In case of admissibility, i.e. if the President has assessed that the second and third conditions are met, the Secretariat will
send the Application to the “responding party”, that is the opposing party (or parties) 557  named in the Application, and which
the President has considered to be signatories (or successors) of an ICC arbitration agreement, see art.1(5) of the Emergency
Arbitrator Rules. Ideally, the notification of the Application to the responding party would take place within 24 hours upon
receipt by the Secretariat.
29-32
In case of the non-admissibility of the Application, the Secretariat informs the parties that the Emergency Arbitrator Proceedings
“shall not take place with respect to some or all of the parties and shall transmit a copy of the Application to them for
information”, art.1(5) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules. In other words, the responding party (or parties) will be informed
of the relief requested from it (or them) by the applicant, even if the Application is considered not admissible by the ICC
Court’s President. This notification will be made for information, so as to allow full transparency. This solution differs from
the comparable situation of the filing of a Request for Arbitration. Pursuant to art.4(4) of the Rules, where the claimant fails
to comply with certain requirements for the Request for Arbitration, in particular fails to pay the filing fee, the Secretariat may
close the file, without the respondent ever finding out that such Request had been filed with the ICC.
29-33
The decision of the ICC Court’s President to accept or not to accept an Application is a purely administrative decision. There
is no requirement that the President give reasons. Likewise, no recourse can be sought against such decision within the ICC
arbitration system. The President’s decision is to be treated in a way analogous to any decision taken by the ICC Court under
the Rules.
29-34
If the Application is considered not to be admissible by the ICC Court’s President, the Emergency Arbitration proceedings
come to an end. Out of the US$40,000 advance on costs paid by the applicant, the ICC retains at least US$5,000 to cover its
administrative costs, art.7(5) of the Emergency Arbitrator Rules.
Footnotes
557
It can be concluded by way of analogy, and thus indirectly from art.2(ii) that the singular word “responding party”
includes one or more responding parties. The next revision of the Rules will have to amend them, so as to cure a minor
drafting oversight.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
