Article 18(3), UKBC-ICCARBN 474407005 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Article 18(3)
Handbook of ICC Arbitration: Commentary and Materials 5th Ed.
Mainwork
Part I - Arbitration Rules
Chapter 5 - The Arbitral Proceedings
International systems from a procedural point of view
Article 18(3)
“The arbitral tribunal may deliberate at any location it considers appropriate.”
18-47
As is discussed under art.32, Tribunals are required to function in a collegial fashion. 69  The Tribunal’s deliberations are, of
course, private and confidential. Usually, they are ongoing once the main evidentiary hearing has taken place. It is commonplace
for arbitrators to discuss the credibility and weight to be given to each witness as the hearings are progressing. Article 18(2)
focuses on in-person or video conference deliberations of the Tribunal. In many instances, Tribunals will exchange their
comments, whether preliminary or otherwise, by email.
18-48
Many presidents seek to have the deliberations as to the final award commence immediately after the last hearing, whether it
is the evidentiary hearing or the legal argument. Therefore, the initial deliberations may take place at the place of arbitration,
if the hearing took place there or at any other place convenient to the members of the Tribunal. 70  Depending on the issues to
be decided, face to face meetings often provide the best results of deliberations, and art.18(3) gives the required flexibility to
achieve this result. However, one can say that thanks to the increase use of videoconferences following the global outbreak of
the Covid-19 pandemic, deliberations among arbitrators now frequently take place virtually. The positive result of this change
is that there should be fewer delays due to logistical issues associated with travel for deliberations.
Footnotes
69
See para.32-5.
70
The convenience cannot be at the sole financial expense of the parties. If arbitrators want to attend an international
arbitration conference at the other end of the globe, and use that opportunity to also meet and deliberate, they can hardly
expect the parties to assume the travel expenses for that trip.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
