Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638663 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section A. - Introduction
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 9 - Award
Section A. - Introduction
(a) Destination of an international arbitration—the award
9. 01
Parties to transborder transactions who go to the trouble and expense of taking their disputes to international arbitration do so
in the expectation that, unless a settlement is reached along the way, the process will lead to an award. They also expect that,
subject to any right of recourse, the award will be final and binding upon them. Both international and institutional rules of
arbitration reflect this expectation. Article 34.2 of the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law (UNCITRAL) states simply: ‘All awards shall be made in writing and shall be final and binding on the parties. The
parties shall carry out all awards without delay.’ The Rules of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), recognising the
possibility of some form of challenge to an award at the place of arbitration under the lex arbitri, are more circumspect:
Every award shall be binding on the parties. By submitting the dispute to arbitration under the Rules, the parties
undertake to carry out any award without delay and shall be deemed to have waived their right to any form of
recourse insofar as such waiver can validly be made. 1
9. 02
As the UNCITRAL Rules suggest, there may be more than one award in any given dispute. Indeed, a number of institutional
rules expressly empower arbitral tribunals to make separate awards on different issues at different times. 2  These powers reflect
the practical reality that, during the course of an arbitration, an arbitral tribunal may be called upon to make more than one
award at different times on different issues between the parties. 3  For example, the tribunal may make an early decision on
its jurisdiction, rather than take the risk of proceeding to the merits of the case and then, perhaps, deciding later that it lacks
jurisdiction. Alternatively, it may make a partial award of a sum of money that it considers to be indisputably due and payable
by one party to the other. 4
9. 03
All ‘awards’ are ‘final’ in the sense that they dispose ‘finally’ of the issues decided in them (subject to any challenge or available
procedure for correction or interpretation), and they are ‘binding’ on the parties. 5  The award that disposes ‘finally’ of all
outstanding issues is known as the ‘final award’. A final award, in this sense, is usually the outcome of arbitral proceedings
that have been contested throughout. However, it may embody an agreed settlement between the parties, in which case it is
generally known as a ‘consent award’. 6  Another category is an award in proceedings in which a party has failed or refused to
participate, in which case it is usually described as a ‘default award’.
9. 04
Each of these different types of award are considered in this chapter. Since all awards are dispositive of the issues that they
determine, it is important that the arbitral tribunal does its best to ensure not only that the award is correct, but also that it is
enforceable across international frontiers. Indeed, several institutional rules impose an express obligation on arbitral tribunals
to make every effort to ensure the enforceability of their awards. 7

Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638663 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
(b) Definition of an award
9. 05
There is no internationally accepted definition of the term ‘award’. Indeed, no definition is to be found in the main international
conventions dealing with arbitration, including the Geneva treaties, the New York Convention, and the Model Law. Although
the New York Convention is directed to the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards, 8  the nearest that it comes to a
definition is in Article I(2): ‘The term “arbitral awards” shall include not only awards made by arbitrators appointed for each
case but also those made by permanent arbitral bodies to which the parties have submitted.’
9. 06
At one stage, it was proposed that there should be a definition of the term ‘award’ in the Model Law, but ultimately none was
adopted. One suggested solution illustrates the difficulty of finding a definition that encompasses not only final awards, but also
partial awards, which dispose of only some issues. The proposed definition was as follows:
Award means a final award which disposes of all issues submitted to the arbitral tribunal and any other decision
of the arbitral tribunal which finally determines any question of substance or the question of its competence or
any other question of procedure but, in the latter case, only if the arbitral tribunal terms its decision an award. 9
As this proposed definition shows, the need to distinguish between awards that are final and other decisions of a tribunal that
are not is a complicating factor. The possible solution of defining each separately was not adopted. The Model Law also plainly
contemplates that there may be more than one award during the course of an arbitration. For example, a plea that the arbitral
tribunal does not have jurisdiction may be dealt with either in the final award or as a ‘preliminary question’; thus, in a ‘Model
Law country’, if the tribunal takes the second course, its partial award may be challenged in the competent court within thirty
days of its notification to the parties. 10
9. 07
The time limit for challenge of an award generally begins to run from the date on which the award was issued. 11  Once the
final award has been made, it may be impossible for a party to challenge any element in it that flows from a previously
unchallenged partial award. Moreover, only an ‘award’ will qualify for recognition and enforcement under the relevant
international conventions, including the New York Convention. Thus important consequences flow from a ruling or decision
of the arbitral tribunal that has the status of an award.
9. 08
The term ‘award’ should generally be reserved for decisions that finally determine the substantive issues with which they
deal. 12  This involves distinguishing between awards, which are concerned with substantive issues, and procedural orders and
directions, which are concerned with the conduct of the arbitration. Procedural orders and directions help to move the arbitration
forward; they deal with such matters as the exchange of written evidence, the production of documents, protective measures,
and the arrangements for the conduct of the hearing. They do not have the status of awards and they may perhaps be called into
question after the final award has been made (for example as evidence of ‘bias’, or ‘lack of due process’). 13
(c) Which decisions have the status of an award?
9. 09
Distinguishing between an ‘award’ and an ‘order’ may not be as easy as simply reading the title that an arbitral tribunal chooses
to give to its ruling; it is a matter of substance not form. The English High Court identified the following factors as being
relevant to distinguishing an award from an order: 14
 
•real weight is to be given to the substance and not merely the form of the decision;

Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638663 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
•a decision is more likely to be an award if it finally disposes of the matters submitted to arbitration so as to render the
tribunal functus officio, either entirely or in relation to that issue or claim;
 
•the nature of the issues considered in the decision is significant, as substantive rights and liabilities of parties are likely to
be dealt with in the form of an award, whereas a decision dealing purely with procedural issues is less likely to be an award;
 
•the tribunal’s own description of the decision is relevant but not conclusive;
 
•the perception of a reasonable recipient of the tribunal’s decision is relevant;
 
•the reasonable recipient is likely to take into account the objective attributes of the decision, including the formality of
the language, the level of detail in the reasoning, and whether the decision complies with the formal requirements for an
award under any applicable rules.
9. 10
Both the Paris Court of Appeal and a US Federal Court of Appeals have classified certain arbitral decisions as awards, even
though they have been entitled ‘orders’ by tribunals.
9. 11
The Paris Court of Appeal decision in Brasoil 15  arose from an ICC arbitration under a contract whereby Brasoil agreed to
drill a number of wells in the Libyan desert for the Management and Implementation Authority of the ‘Great Man-Made River
Project’. Brasoil started an ICC arbitration following termination of the contract by the Authority in 1990. In 1995, the arbitral
tribunal issued a partial award in which it held Brasoil liable for the malfunctioning of the wells that it had constructed. In
1997, during the damages phase of the proceedings, the Authority submitted certain documents that Brasoil alleged had been
fraudulently withheld during the liability phase. Brasoil requested that the tribunal review its partial award on liability. In May
1998, the tribunal denied Brasoil’s request in what it described as an ‘order’. In subsequent challenge proceedings, the Paris
Court of Appeal granted Brasoil’s request to have the ‘order’ set aside. The Court held that, although described as an ‘order’, the
tribunal’s decision was, in fact, an ‘award’, because it purported to make a final determination of a substantive issue between
the parties. 16  In so finding, the Court of Appeal noted that:
The qualification of [a decision as an] award does not depend on the terms used by the arbitrators or by the parties
[ … ] after a five-month deliberation, the arbitral tribunal rendered the ‘order’ of 14 May 1998, by which, after
a lengthy examination of the parties’ positions, it declared that the request could not be granted because Brasoil
had not proven that there had been fraud as alleged. This reasoned decision—by which the arbitrators considered
the contradictory theories of the parties and examined in detail whether they were founded, and solved, in a final
manner, the dispute between the parties concerning the admissibility of Brasoil’s request for a review, by denying
it and thereby ending the dispute submitted to them—appears to be an exercise of its jurisdictional power by the
arbitral tribunal [ … ] Notwithstanding its qualification as an ‘order’, the decision of 14 May 1998 [ … ] is thus
indeed an award. 17
9. 12
Some years later, the French Supreme Court provided a definition of an arbitral award that supported this interpretation.
Addressing a challenge to an award on the basis of an alleged professional relationship between the chairman of the arbitral
tribunal and the parent company of the guarantor of debts owed by the respondent, the Court of Cassation held that ‘only proper
arbitral awards may be challenged through an action to set aside’ and went on to define awards as:
[ … ] decisions made by the arbitrators which resolve in a definitive manner all or part of the dispute that
is submitted to them on the merits, jurisdiction or a procedural matter which leads them to put an end to the
proceedings. 18
9. 13
The decision of the Seventh Circuit Federal Court of Appeal in True North 19  addressed similar issues. True North, a US
advertising company, and Publicis Communications, an affiliate of the Publicis global communications group, entered into a
joint venture in 1989, which eventually led the parties to arbitration in London. As one of its requests for relief in the arbitration,
True North requested that Publicis disclose tax records filed with the US Internal Revenue Service and the Securities and

Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638663 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
Exchange Commission (SEC). In October 1998, the chairman of the arbitral tribunal, ‘for and on behalf of the arbitrators’,
signed an unreasoned ‘order’ directing Publicis to disclose the requested tax records to True North. Publicis failed to comply
and True North applied to the court to confirm the arbitral decision. Publicis argued that the tribunal’s decision constituted no
more than a procedural order and that only finally determinative ‘awards’ are subject to confirmation or enforcement. The issue
ultimately came before the Seventh Circuit Federal Court of Appeals, which disagreed, reasoning that the finality of a decision
was the key to its recognition or enforcement under the New York Convention. In so doing, it described Publicis’s approach
as ‘extreme and untenable formalism’, and observed:
Although Publicis suggests that our ruling will cause the international arbitration earth to quake and mountains
to crumble, resolving this case actually requires determining only whether or not this particular order by this
particular arbitration tribunal regarding these particular tax records was final. If the arbitration tribunal’s 30
October 1998 decision was final, then [the district court judge] had the authority to confirm it. If the arbitrators’
decision was not final, then the district court jumped the gun. 20
9. 14
Referring to an earlier edition of this volume, the Federal Court of Appeals noted that the arbitral tribunal’s decision on the tax
records was intended to be final and stated that the fact that the ‘order’ was issued prior to the conclusion of the arbitration
was no bar to its enforceability or finality:
The tribunal’s order resolved the dispute, or was supposed to, at any rate. Producing the documents wasn’t just
some procedural matter—it was the very issue True North wanted arbitrated [ … ] The tribunal explicitly carved
out the tax records issue for immediate action from the bulk of the matter still pending, stating that ‘the delivery
of the documents should not await final confirmation in the Final Award’. Requiring the unrelated issues to be
arbitrated to finality before allowing True North to enforce a decision the tribunal called urgent would defeat the
purpose of the tribunal’s order. A ruling on a discreet, time-sensitive issue may be final and ripe for confirmation
even though other claims remain to be addressed by arbitrators. 21
(d) Rendering an internationally enforceable award
9. 15
No arbitral tribunal can be expected to guarantee that its award will be enforceable in whatever country the winner chooses to
enforce it. However, as noted above, every arbitral tribunal must do its best. As Article 42 of the ICC Rules provides: ‘In all
matters not expressly provided for in the Rules, the Court and the arbitral tribunal shall act in the spirit of these Rules and shall
make every effort to make sure that the award is enforceable at law.’ 22  Phrases such as ‘make every effort’ imply an ‘obligation
to perform’, rather than an ‘obligation to achieve a defined result’. Nonetheless, the message is clear: in principle, the eventual
outcome of every arbitration is intended to be a final, enforceable award—as opposed to the outcome of a mediation, which
is intended to be an agreement between the parties.
9. 16
For an arbitral tribunal to achieve the standard of performance required to make an internationally enforceable award, it must first
ensure that it has jurisdiction to decide all of the issues before it. The arbitral tribunal must also comply with any procedural rules
governing the arbitration. Such rules commonly include, for example, allocation of the costs of the arbitration, 23  identifying
the seat of the arbitration, and having the award formally approved by an arbitral institution (as with an ICC award). 24  The
arbitral tribunal must also sign and date the award, and arrange for it to be delivered to the parties in the manner laid down in the
relevant law or by the rules that apply to the arbitration. If the arbitral tribunal has carried out its work adequately, its decision
should not be susceptible to any post-award recourse that may otherwise be available to the parties. 25
9. 17
Moreover, Article V(2)(b) of the New York Convention provides that, even when these conditions have been met, an award
need not be enforced if it violates the public policy of the place of enforcement:

Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638663 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if the competent authority in the
country where recognition and enforcement is sought finds that [ … ] the recognition or enforcement of the
award would be contrary to the public policy of that country.
This provision gives discretion to the judicial authority at the recognition and enforcement stage, highlighting the impossibility
of guaranteeing international enforceability at the time of issuing the award (particularly given that the jurisdiction(s) in which
a tribunal’s award will ultimately be enforced are often difficult to predict at the time when the award is issued).
9. 18
Given the complexity of the task facing an arbitral tribunal, the arbitrators should be adequately trained and experienced. 26
An award may comply meticulously with the agreed rules of procedure and with the law governing the arbitration, but may
fail to comply with some special requirement of the law of the place of enforcement, so that the award may be unenforceable
in that jurisdiction.
Footnotes
1
ICC Rules, Art. 35.6. See also SIAC Rules, r. 32.11.
2
SIAC Rules, r. 32.5; and LCIA Rules, Art. 26.1.
3
The authors recommend use of the term ‘partial awards’, rather than ‘interim’, or ‘provisional’, awards. The latter terms,
particularly in the civil law context, can be interpreted to mean that such awards are not final, when they are indeed final.
4
Some modern arbitration statutes make a specific distinction between interim, partial, and final awards. The Netherlands
Arbitration Act 2015, s. 1049, provides that: ‘The arbitral tribunal may render a final award, a partial final award, or
an interim award.’ Commentary on the materially identical version of this article in the 1986 Netherlands Arbitration
Act by Sanders and van den Berg, The Netherlands Arbitration Act 1986 (Kluwer International Law, 1987) suggests
that partial awards are given in respect of substantive issues that are separated, such as liability and quantum; interim
awards are given on jurisdictional issues; and simple orders are made in respect of procedural issues. The Swiss Private
International Law Act 1987 (Swiss PIL), Ch. 12, provides for ‘preliminary awards’ in relation to jurisdictional issues in
s. 186(3), while ‘partial awards’ that finally determine the issue are provided for in s. 188: see Geisinger, International
Arbitration in Switzerland: A Handbook for Practitioners (2nd edn, Wolters Kluwer, 2013), pp. 226–227.
5
The English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 39, is an exception to this general rule in granting a power to make ‘provisional
awards’ if the parties agree that the arbitral tribunal shall have such power. Interestingly, s. 39 mentions the word ‘award’
only in the marginal note and the body of the section refers to ‘orders’. Whether such provisional orders are enforceable
under the New York Convention is questionable and would be a matter for the courts of the country in which enforcement
is sought: see Hunter and Landau, The English Arbitration Act 1996: Text and Notes (Wolters Kluwer, 1998), p. 35. For
an example of the English courts enforcing a provisional order made by a tribunal under s. 39, see Pearl Petroleum Co
Ltd v Kurdistan Regional Govt of Iraq [2016] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 441.
6
See English Arbitration Act 1996, s. 51(2)–(3).
7
See, e.g., ICC Rules, Art. 42 (‘the arbitral tribunal [ … ] shall make every effort to make sure that the award is enforceable
at law’). See also LCIA Rules, Art. 32.2, and SIAC Rules, r. 41.2.
8
And of arbitration agreements: see Chapter 2.
9
Broches, ‘Recourse against the award; Enforcement of the award: UNCITRAL’s Project for a Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration’ (1984) 2 ICCA Congress Series 201, at 208.
10
Model Law, Art. 16(3). Model Law jurisdictions have taken differing approaches to determining the consequences
of a failure to challenge a partial award on jurisdiction within the specified time limit. New Zealand recently passed
an amendment to its 1996 Arbitration Act clarifying that failure to make a request to the High Court challenging a
jurisdictional decision within thirty days ‘operates as a waiver of any right to later object’ (NZ Arbitration Amendment
Act 2019, 7 May 2019, s. 4). In contrast, in Singapore, a non-participating respondent who fails to challenge a
jurisdictional award retains the right to challenge the tribunal’s jurisdiction in set-aside proceedings (see Rakna
Arakshaka Lanka Ltd v Avant Garde Maritime Services (Private) Limited [2019] SGCA 33).

Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638663 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
11
See, e.g., English Arbitration Act, s.70(3). Where there has been any arbitral process of appeal or review, the relevant
time limit in England runs from the date when the applicant invoking any such post-award remedy is notified of the
result of such process (English Arbitration Act, s. 70(3)).
12
Some commentators have suggested that a ‘preliminary award’ may be treated as ‘provisional’. However, this concept
seems to be fraught with peril; the authors suggest that any decision that is not finally determinative of the issues with
which it deals should not be described as an ‘award’.
13
If a party is aggrieved by a procedural order or direction, it is sensible for that party to make a formal protest. In this
way, it will reserve the position in case it emerges, at a later stage, that the ruling in question has, e.g., denied that party
a proper opportunity to present its case or to respond to the case submitted by the opposing party.
14
ZCCM Investments Holdings PLC v Kansanshi Holdings PLC & Anor [2019] EWHC 1285 (Comm), at 40. See also
Uganda v Rift Valley Railways Uganda Ltd [2021] EWHC 970 (in which the Republic of Uganda’s application to set
aside a procedural order was dismissed on the ground that the order would not have been understood by a reasonable
recipient as an award and did not finally determine any issues between the parties).
15
Braspetro Oil Services Co. v The Management and Implementation Authority of the Great Man-Made River Project,
Paris cour d’appel, 1 July 1999, (1999) 14 Mealey’s Intl Arb Rep 8, at [G-1]–[G-7].
16
For a commentary on this decision, see Gill, ‘The definition of award under the New York Convention’ (2008) 2 Disp
Res Intl 114, at 119, in which the author writes that ‘the court found that the “procedural order” was effectively an award
because it settled a substantive issue between the parties. The tribunal was exercising its jurisdictional power and its
decision was therefore an award.’
17
Braspetro Oil Services Co. v The Management and Implementation Authority of the Great Man-Made River Project,
Paris cour d’appel, 1 July 1999, (1999) XXIVa YBCA 297, at [1]–[4].
18
Groupe Antoine Tabet v République du Congo, Case No. 09-72.439, Cass. Civ. 1ere, 12 October 2011, n.p.
19
Publicis Communications and Publicis SA v True North Communications Inc. (2000) XXV YBCA 1152.
20
Ibid., at [4].
21
Ibid., at [9]. For a commentary on this decision, see Murphy, ‘Enforceability of foreign arbitral decisions’ (2001) 67
Arbitration 369, at 371, in which the author concludes that: ‘[T]his decision has clearly announced that all orders or
awards made in the arbitral process are capable of recognition and enforcement abroad by means of the New York
Convention, so long as the finality test is satisfied [ … ] when rendering any decision, it may be prudent to determine
whether or not the issue is being dealt with finally, to recite that in the decision and, despite the approach of the Seventh
Circuit, to label the decision or order as an award to ensure that no argument of form over substance can take place.’ See
also, e.g., Santos v GE Co., No. 10 Civ. 6948, 2011 US Dist. LEXIS 131925 (SDNY 2011), at [14]–[15]; Yonir Techs, Inc.
v Duration System (1992) Ltd, 244 F.Supp.2d 195, 204 (SDNY 2002). ‘[T]hese authorities suggest that, regardless of
whether the form of the arbitral measure (e.g., an award or order) resembles a final award, if the substance of the measure
serves a discrete function and effects a final disposition of a particular issue, the interim measure is confirmable and
enforceable’: Sherwin and Rennie, ‘Interim relief under international arbitration rules and guidelines: A comparative
analysis’ (2009) 20 Am Rev Int’l Arb 318, at 326.
22
See also LCIA Rules, Art. 32.2.
23
For example, ICC Rules, Art. 38.6; UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 40.
24
ICC Rules, Art. 34.
25
For further discussion of interpretation, correction, and revision of awards, see paragraphs 9.206ff.
26
See Chapter 10, paragraphs 10.02, 10.08, and 10.61.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
