Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638624 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section A. - Introduction
Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration 7th Ed.
Mainwork
Chapter 4 - Establishment and Organisation of an Arbitral Tribunal
Section A. - Introduction
4. 01
In order to start an arbitration, an appropriate form of notice or request for arbitration must be delivered in compliance with the
relevant procedural rules. These will usually be the rules of the arbitral institution under which the arbitration is to be conducted
or the rules referred to in the agreement to arbitrate (such as the UNCITRAL Rules). If there is no agreed upon set of rules, it
will be necessary to comply with the rules of the relevant applicable law, which will be the law of the seat of the arbitration.
4. 02
Once the decision to start an arbitration has been taken and the appropriate form of notice or request for arbitration has been
delivered, the next step is to establish the arbitral tribunal. Whilst a national court is a standing body to which an application
may be made at almost any time, an arbitral tribunal must be brought into existence before it can exercise jurisdiction. This
contrast between an arbitral tribunal and a national court is seen most clearly when a dispute has arisen, attempts at settlement
have failed, and one of the parties has decided that the time has come to pursue its legal rights. If the dispute is to be taken to
court, the claimant need only initiate whatever form of originating process is appropriate to set the machinery of justice into
operation. The parties will have no role to play in the composition of that court. It is different if the dispute is to be referred to
arbitration, as there is no permanent standing body of arbitrators and no decisions can be taken or relief sought until the tribunal
(or in specific circumstances, a preliminary emergency arbitrator) has been appointed.
4. 03
The establishment of the tribunal may be a relatively lengthy process, especially where one party (almost always the respondent)
fails to nominate an arbitrator. Even where the relevant rules provide for an institution to make the remaining appointments in
the event of default, this can be especially time-consuming as the institution considers and approaches suitable candidates. 1
Except in cases that are expedited, the establishment of the tribunal is likely to take at least two months from the submission of
the notice or request for arbitration; and in practice it may well take much longer.
4. 04
The question then arises: what can be done pending constitution of the arbitral tribunal, if urgent measures are required?
The traditional response was to rely on the relevant national courts for critical relief. Most modern arbitral systems permit
an application for interim measures to be sought from national courts pending the formation of the tribunal (or even before
the initiation of the arbitration), without such application constituting a waiver of the arbitration agreement. 2  To address the
parties’ need to obtain a quick decision, most institutions have adopted a specific mechanism in their rules. 3  These rules include
summary arbitral proceedings, 4  expedited formation of the tribunal, 5  and (increasingly) the expeditious appointment of an
‘emergency arbitrator’. 6
Footnotes
1
For example, the ICC may consult with the relevant national committees regarding suitable candidates and may appoint
the presiding arbitrator or make default appointments based on the proposal of that committee. If the Court does not
accept the proposal, it may repeat its request or seek a proposal from another national committee or directly appoint
any person it deems suitable (ICC Rules, Art. 13.3). The Court also has the power to make direct appointments without
consulting national committees in certain prescribed circumstances, including where one or more parties is a state or
state entity or where the Court considers that it would be appropriate to appoint an arbitrator from a country where

Section A. - Introduction, UKBC-REDFERN 530638624 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
there is no National Committee (ICC Rules, Art. 13.4). The LCIA makes all final appointments, taking into account
any written agreement or joint nomination by the parties (LCIA Rules, Art. 5.7) and any particular method or criteria
for selection agreed in writing by the parties (LCIA Rules, Art. 5.9). Rule 2 of the ICSID Rules provides for a rather
cumbersome process whereby the claimant has to propose an appointment mechanism, which, if not accepted by the
other party within sixty days, defaults to an institutional system.
2
This principle is generally found in arbitration statutes and institutional rules. See, e.g., Model Law, Art. 9; ICC Rules,
Art. 28.2. For more detail on the legitimate support that can be obtained in support of an arbitration from national courts,
see Chapter 7.
3
See, e.g., LCIA Rules, Art. 9; ICDR Rules, Art. 7; NAI Rules, Arts 35.2-36; ICC Rules, Art. 29 and Appendix V.
4
See, e.g., NAI Rules, Arts 35.2–36; ICC Rules, Art. 30.
5
See, e.g., LCIA Rules, Art. 9A.
6
See, e.g., LCIA Rules, Art. 9B; ICDR Rules, Art. 7; ICC Rules, Art. 29 and Appendix V. See paragraphs 4.11ff for a
more detailed discussion on Emergency Arbitrators and how these solutions work in practice.
End of Document
© NIGEL BLACKABY KC, CONSTANTINE PARTASIDES
KC, ALAN REDFERN
