Section 26. - Security in Admiralty proceedings in England..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section 26. - Security in Admiralty proceedings in England and
Wales or Northern Ireland in case of stay, etc.
White Book 2025  | Commentary last updated February 16, 2015
Volume 2
Section 5 - International Jurisdiction and Enforcement of Judgments
Part - Legislation
Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982
Section 26
Part IV Miscellaneous Provisions
Provisions relating to jurisdiction
26.— Security in Admiralty proceedings in England and Wales or Northern Ireland in case of stay, etc.
5-30
(1) Where in England and Wales or Northern Ireland a court stays or dismisses Admiralty proceedings on the ground
that the dispute in question should be submitted to the determination of the courts of another part of the United
Kingdom or of an overseas country, the court may, if in those proceedings property has been arrested or bail or other
security has been given to prevent or obtain release from arrest—
(a) order that the property arrested be retained as security for the satisfaction of any award or judgment which—
(i) is given in respect of the dispute in the legal proceedings in favour of which those proceedings are stayed
or dismissed; and
(ii) is enforceable in England and Wales or, as the case may be, in Northern Ireland, or
(b) order that the stay or dismissal of those proceedings be conditional on the provision of equivalent security
for the satisfaction of any such award or judgment.
(2) Where the court makes an order under subsection (1), it may attach such conditions to the order as it thinks fit, in
particular conditions with respect to the institution or prosecution of the relevant legal proceedings.
(3) Subject to any provision made by rules of court and to any necessary modifications, the same law and practice
shall apply in relation to property retained in pursuance of an order made by a court under subsection (1) as would
apply if it were held for the purposes of proceedings in that court.
Note
5-30. 1
Amended by the Arbitration Act 1996.

Section 26. - Security in Admiralty proceedings in England..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
