Regulation 10. - Costs order against the Lord Chancellor, UKBC-WHITEBK 458578314...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Regulation 10. - Costs order against the Lord Chancellor
White Book 2025
Volume 2
Section 7 - Legal Representatives—Costs and Litigation Funding
Section 7D - Legal Aid
Regulations under the Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
Civil Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013
Part 3 Costs Orders Against a Legally Aided Party and the Lord Chancellor
10.— Costs order against the Lord Chancellor
7D-113+
(1) This regulation applies where relevant proceedings are finally decided in favour of a non-legally aided party.
(2) Subject to paragraphs (3) to (8), the court may make an order for the payment by the Lord Chancellor to the non-
legally aided party of the whole or any part of the costs incurred by that party in the proceedings (other than the costs
that the legally aided party is required to pay under a section 26(1) costs order).
(3) An order under paragraph (2) may only be made if the following conditions are satisfied—
(a) a section 26(1) costs order is made against the legally aided party in the proceedings, and the amount (if any)
which the legally aided party is required to pay under that costs order is less than the amount of the full costs;
(b) the non-legally aided party makes a request—
(i) under regulation 16(2), within three months of the date on which the section 26(1) costs order is made; or
(ii) after the expiry of the time limit under regulation 16(2), where there is a good reason for the delay in
the request being made;
(c) as regards costs incurred in a court of first instance, the following conditions are met—
(i) the proceedings were instituted by the legally aided party;
(ii) the non-legally aided party is an individual; and
(iii) the court is satisfied that the non-legally aided party will suffer financial hardship unless the order is
made; and
(d) in any case, the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable in the circumstances that provision for the costs
should be made out of public funds.
(4) Where the legally aided party receives civil legal services in connection with only part of the proceedings, the
reference in paragraph (2) to the costs incurred by the non-legally aided party in the proceedings is to be construed

Regulation 10. - Costs order against the Lord Chancellor, UKBC-WHITEBK 458578314...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
as a reference to so much of those costs as is attributable to the part of the proceedings for which civil legal services
are provided.
(5) Where a court decides any proceedings in favour of a non-legally aided party and an appeal lies (with or without
permission) against that decision, any order made under this regulation must not take effect—
(a) where permission to appeal is required, unless the time limit for an application for permission to appeal
expires without such an application being made;
(b) where an application for permission is made within the time limit, unless the application is refused; or
(c) where permission to appeal is granted or is not required, unless the time limit for appeal expires without an
appeal being brought.
(6) Subject to paragraph (7), in determining whether the conditions in paragraph (3)(c)(iii) and (d) are satisfied, the
court must have regard to the resources of the non-legally aided party and of that party’s partner.
(7) The court must not have regard to the resources of the partner of the non-legally aided party if the partner has
a contrary interest in the proceedings.
(8) Where the non-legally aided party is acting in a representative, fiduciary or official capacity and is entitled to
be indemnified in respect of costs from any property, estate or fund, the court must, for the purposes of determining
whether the conditions in paragraph (3)(c)(iii) and (d) are satisfied, have regard to the value of the property, estate or
fund and the resources of any person who has a beneficial interest in that property, estate or fund.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
