2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
2. - ADR and Case Management
White Book 2025  | Commentary last updated May 13, 2025
Volume 2
Section 14 - Alternative Dispute Resolution
Alternative Dispute Resolution
2. - ADR and Case Management
ADR as Part of Active Case Management
14-5
The use of ADR is to be encouraged or, where appropriate, mandated by the courts as part of active case management: CPR
rr.1.1(2)(f), 1.4(2)(e), 3.1(2)(o) and (p) (see Vol.1 paras 1.4.9 and 3.1.15).
Pre Churchill the emphasis was on the court encouraging ADR. Accordingly, until 1st October 2024, r.1.4(2)(e) stated that
active case management includes the court’s encouragement of the parties to use ADR procedures “if the court considers that
appropriate”. Such encouragement may be given at various points in the procedure laid down in the CPR and related practice
directions and may be given, either on the court’s own initiative, or in response to an initiative of the parties (as to the latter,
see r.26.4). The Glossary attached to the CPR explains that ADR is a collective description of methods of resolving disputes
“otherwise than through the normal trial process”. In terms, this includes simple negotiation between the parties not involving
third parties (apart from the parties’ legal representatives). However, the purpose of r.1.4(2)(e) is to draw attention to methods
other than simple negotiation.
Post April 2013 the court’s duty to encourage the parties to use ADR has to be interpreted in light of the amendments relating
to the overriding objective relating to proportionality. Moreover, the parties are equally enjoined to assist the court in furthering
the overriding objective, which as Sir Geoffrey Vos, then Chancellor of the High Court stated in OMV Petrom SA v Glencore
International AG [2017] EWCA Civ 195 at [9], obliges them “to conduct litigation collaboratively and to engage constructively
in a settlement process”. Post 1 October 2024 the CPR was amended to align the court’s case management powers with Churchill
and from that date 1.4(2)(e) provides that active case management includes “ordering or encouraging the parties to use, and
facilitating the use of, alternative dispute resolution”. See also the other Churchill related amendments made by the Civil
Procedure (Amendment No.3) Rules 2024 (SI 2024/839) which are referred or in para.14-1.
The ADR process most often used, apart from negotiation, is mediation. Although it is a process that requires some time and
cost, in difficult cases a skilled mediator can oil the wheels of settlement in ways that are likely to be more effective than the
normal process of negotiation by discussion and offer and counter-offer (Hickman v Blake Lapthorn [2006] EWHC 12 (QB)).
It should also be remembered that, when considering case management, mediation can be successfully deployed to deal with
particular issues in a case if there are reasons not to attempt to settle the entire claim at that juncture—see paras 14-7 and
14-8. Another dispute resolution process is known as med-arb. In IDA Ltd v Southampton University [2006] EWCA Civ 145;
[2006] R.P.C. 21; (2006) 29(5) I.P.D. 29038, CA, the Court of Appeal stated that this process (where a mediator trusted by both
sides is given authority to decide the terms of a binding settlement agreement) is particularly apt for the resolution of disputes
about entitlements to patents. Also note that Early Neutral Evaluation is referred to in the Court Guides listed in para.14-4
above. Further, in October 2015 the court’s general powers of management at CPR r.3.1(2)(m) “take any other step or make
any other order for the purpose of managing the case and furthering the overriding objective” were amended by the addition
of the following words: “, including hearing an Early Neutral Evaluation with the aim of helping the parties settle the case: see
Lomax v Lomax [2019] EWCA Civ 1467; [2019] 1 W.L.R. 6527 (Vol.1 para.3.1.5)”. Carr CJ, speaking at London International
Dispute Week in June 2024, commented on the court’s case management powers following Churchill stating that:
“… judges are increasingly likely to be called upon—further to the requirement to manage cases—to consider
whether to mandate the use of ADR. And not just to consider the question of whether to do so, but also the broader
question of which form of dispute resolution to mandate.”

2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
The Lady Chief Justice added that the judiciary and legal practitioners will need to become familiar with the different forms
of ADR explaining:
“Here the parties will need to play their role. They will need to consider, constructively and further to the CPR’s
overriding objective, which process might best suit their circumstances. They will need to inform the court of
this view. And, as importantly, judges will need to be familiar with the different forms and their features, so that
they can properly assess which is best-suited” (Michael Cross, Lady chief justice calls for united front on ADR,
Law Gazette, 4 June 2024).
The Power of the Court to Order ADR–Churchill
14-6
Churchill v Merthyr Tydfil CBC [2023] EWCA Civ 1416; [2024] 1 W.L.R. 3827 made it clear that the court can order what it
described as non-court-based dispute resolution, i.e. ADR. Before the appeal was heard it was apparent that Halsey was likely
to be reviewed by the Court of Appeal, and seven organisations, including The Law Society, The Bar Council and several ADR
organisations, intervened.
The Court of Appeal held that the court could lawfully stay proceedings for, or order, the parties to engage in a non-court-based
dispute resolution process subject to these provisos: that the order made did not impair the very essence of the claimant’s right
to proceed to a judicial hearing and was proportionate to achieving the legitimate aim of settling the dispute fairly, quickly
and at reasonable cost.
The Court of Appeal, however, did not lay down fixed principles as to what would be relevant to determining whether
proceedings should be stayed or whether to order the parties to engage in ADR process. Instead, the approach is that the
court should take into account all the circumstances of the case, including the nature of the ADR procedure in question, when
considering whether a particular process is or is not likely or appropriate for the purpose of achieving the important objective of
bringing about a fair, speedy and cost-effective solution to the dispute and the proceedings, in accordance with the overriding
objective.
The Bar Council, intervening, submitted (at para.61) that the following factors were relevant to the exercise of the court’s
discretion:
 
(i)the form of ADR being considered;
 
(ii)whether the parties were legally advised or represented;
 
(iii)whether ADR was likely to be effective or appropriate without such advice or representation;
 
(iv)whether it was made clear to the parties that, if they did not settle, they were free to pursue their claim or defence;
 
(v)the urgency of the case and the reasonableness of the delay caused by ADR;
 
(vi)whether that delay would vitiate the claim or give rise to or exacerbate any limitation issue;
 
(vii)the costs of ADR, both in absolute terms, and relative to the parties’ resources and the value of the claim;
 
(viii)whether there was any realistic prospect of the claim being resolved through ADR;
 
(ix)whether there was a significant imbalance in the parties’ levels of resource, bargaining power or sophistication;
 
(x)the reasons given by a party for not wishing to mediate: for example, if there had already been a recent unsuccessful
attempt at ADR; and

2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
(xi)the reasonableness and proportionality of the sanction, in the event that a party declined ADR in the face of an order
of the Court.
Vos MR in giving judgment in Churchill noted the observation by Dyson LJ in Halsey that he found “it difficult to conceive
of circumstances in which it would be appropriate to exercise ...” a power to order unwilling parties to mediate but did not
agree with it. He said:
“Moreover, I would not go so far. Experience has shown that it is extremely beneficial for the parties to disputes
to be able to settle their differences cheaply and quickly. Even with initially unwilling parties, mediation can often
be successful. Mediation, early neutral evaluation and other means of non-court-based dispute resolution are, in
general terms, cheaper and quicker than court-based solutions. Whether the court should order or facilitate any
particular method of non-court-based dispute resolution in a particular case is a matter of the court’s discretion,
to which many factors will be relevant.”
The Court of Appeal stated that these matters, those mentioned by Mr Churchill about the internal disputes’ procedure and
the Halsey factors (at [16]–[35]) were “…likely to have some relevance” and added: “But other factors too may be relevant
depending on all the circumstances.”
Mills and Reeve Trust Corp Ltd v Martin [2023] EWHC 654 (Ch) and Jones v Tracey [2023] EWHC 2256 (Ch) are examples
of cases where the court has carefully considered all of the circumstances of the case in the context of ADR.
One aspect of the Churchill judgment which may fall to be clarified by the courts sooner rather than later is the weight that
should be placed on the merits of the case when considering whether to encourage, stay for, or order ADR. “The merits of the
case” is one of the tests referred to in Halsey as being relevant to the costs question of whether a party had behaved unreasonably
in refusing ADR (para.16). To some, a case or a defence with excellent merits is a reason not to deploy ADR whereas to others
that is a positive indication that some form of ADR should be used (see para.14-15). See also Masood Ahmed, University of
Leicester, “The pre-ADR exception to the without prejudice rule, judicial ADR pluralism, and assessing an unreasonable refusal
to ADR: Jones v Tracey ”; C.J.Q. 2024, 43(1), [28]–[41]. Also, views on merits are by their nature subjective. As the court
noted in Stoney-Andersen v Abbas [2023] EWHC 2964 (Ch) at [56]:
“It is a commonplace that both sides are told by their lawyers that they will win. But they cannot both be right.
Indeed, sometimes, both sides are wrong.”
The issue of the merits of the case in this context fell to be considered in DKH Retail Ltd v City Football Group Ltd [2024]
EWHC 3231 (Ch) when the court considered an application by a claimant for an order for mediation prior to an imminent trial.
The defendant contested the application on several grounds, contending that mediation was not likely to lead to settlement, that
the court should only order mediation where there was a realistic prospect that it would succeed, that the defendant was entitled
to a judicial determination and that negotiations between experienced solicitors had not reached agreement. Miles J rejected
the defendant’s submissions stating:
“… in many cases the parties’ positions in the litigation are diametrically opposed and it may easily be said that
each party requires a judicial determination. But nonetheless the parties come through ADR to recognise the
desirability of settling for less than their strict legal rights and compromising their positions. Experience shows
that mediation is capable of cracking even the hardest nuts. The process sometimes succeeds in cases where the
parties appear at first to have intractable differences.”
The court, having noted Churchill and the October 2024 amendments to the CPR (see para.14-1 above), ordered that mediation
take place the following month. The court was informed shortly afterwards that the case had been settled.
In two post-Churchill cases the court has contemplated parties mediating for a second time where the first mediation did not
result in resolution: Heyes v Holt [2024] EWHC 779 (Ch) (at [50]) and Francis v Pearson, [2024] EWHC 605 (KB) (at [87]–
[92]). In Pentagon Food Group Ltd and others v B Cadman Ltd [2024] EWHC 2513 (Comm), HHJ Tindal, sitting as a judge
of the High Court, encouraged the parties to consider a third mediation:

2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
“It is quite possible that in the context of me having made the determinations that I have and having said the things
that I just have, it may well be possible for the parties to finally put this litigation behind them.”
Case Management and the Duty of the Parties
14-7
Parties have a duty to help the court in furthering the overriding objective and, therefore, they have a duty to consider seriously
the possibility of ADR procedures being utilised for the purpose of resolving their claim or particular issues within it, when
ordered or encouraged by the court to do so (see also para.14-8). In Garritt-Critchley v Ronnan [2014] EWHC 1774 (Ch) (at
[25]) the court took the view this was a continuing duty, throughout the litigation. The discharge of the parties’ duty in this
respect may be relevant to the question of costs because, when exercising its discretion as to costs, the court must have regard
to all the circumstances, including the conduct of all the parties (r.44.3(4) and (5) and “…. whether a party failed to comply
with an order for alternative dispute resolution, or unreasonably failed to engage in alternative dispute resolution” r.44.2(5)(e)).
Also see PGF II SA v OMFS Co [2013] EWCA Civ 1288; [2014] 1 W.L.R. 1386.
Case management: the manner in which the court may facilitate the use
of ADR procedures
14-8
The overriding objective in the CPR, which is to enable “… the court to deal with cases justly and at proportionate cost” (r.1.1(1)),
requires the court to order or encourage the use of an ADR procedure, in appropriate cases, and to facilitate the use of such
procedure, as one of the elements of active case management (r.1.4(2)(e) as amended with effect from 1 October 2024—see
para.14-1). Further, as mentioned in para.14-1, the Civil Procedure (Amendment No.3) Rules 2024 (SI 2024/839) made a series
of amendments to the court’s case management powers in relation to ADR, effective from 1st October 2024. The Court of
Appeal has made it clear that “facilitating” includes staying proceedings for, or ordering, the parties to engage in ADR process:
Churchill v Merthyr Tydfil CBC [2023] EWCA Civ 1416; [2024] 1 W.L.R. 3827. The concept of proportionality reinforces the
need for the court to keep the potential of ADR procedures under review whenever it deals with any aspect of case management.
It should be noted, when considering case management, that although ADR, and mediation in particular, often leads to settlement
of the entire action, there is the potential to use an ADR process to attempt settlement or agreement of discrete issues. Recent
examples of this include parties being ordered to use an ADR process to: (a) attempt agreement of a complex costs budget
(Hadley v Przybylo [2023] EWHC 1392 (KB)); and (b) agree a bill of costs with a view to avoiding a detailed assessment
(Elphicke v Times Media Ltd [2024] EWHC 2595 (KB)). Further, the recent decisions by Master Thornett in Worcester v Hopley
[2024] EWHC 2181 (KB) and Jenkins v Thurrock Council [2024] EWHC 2248 give rise to the prospect that parties might agree,
or be ordered, to use an ADR process to explore agreement of costs budgets and or directions, rather than wait for a lengthy
period until directions and decisions can be given at a Costs and Case Management Conference. (See also para.14-17.) It also
includes the full integration of ADR into the litigation process: see Abdel-Kader v Kensington and Chelsea RLBC (Grenfell
Tower Litigation) [2022] EWHC 2006 (QB).
The following multi-party cases are further examples of ADR being used to resolve some, but not all, of the issues in the
litigation: Supershield Ltd v Siemens Building Technologies FE Ltd [2010] EWCA Civ 7; [2010] 2 All E.R. (Comm) 1185;
[2010] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 349 and Mouchel Ltd v Van Oord (UK) Ltd [2011] EWHC 72 (TCC); 135 Con. L.R. 183. The report
on Senior Master Fontaine’s case management of the Grenfell Tower Litigation at [2022] EWHC 2006 (QB) illustrates many
facets of how ADR can be deployed during the case management of a multi-party case and that both the court and lawyers
now demonstrate a sophisticated grasp of how to interweave an ADR process in with the litigation process of a complex action.
Master Fontaine said (at para.105):
“I consider that the ADR process being established is the obviously appropriate course to attempt before
proceeding with litigation involving more than 1,000 Claimants and multiple Defendants. Although it may be that

2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
not all issues will be capable of settlement, it is highly likely that there will be a sufficient number of settlements
and/or narrowing of issues so that when the stay is lifted more efficient progress to resolution of these claims
can be made in the litigation.”
The manner in which the court may facilitate the use of ADR procedure includes the following:
 
(i)by staying proceedings for, or ordering, the parties to engage in ADR process, provided that the order does not impair
the very essence of the claimant’s right to proceed to a judicial hearing, and is proportionate to achieving the legitimate
aim of settling the dispute fairly, quickly and at reasonable cost (Churchill v Merthyr Tydfil CBC [2023] EWCA Civ 1416;
[2024] 1 W.L.R. 3827 and 1.4(2)(e) as amended from 1 October 2024—see para.14-1); see also the amendments to court’s
case management powers in relation to ADR referred to in the paragraph immediately above and note that, with reference
to Multi-Track directions, r.29.2(1A) provides that “When giving directions, the court must consider whether to order or
encourage the parties to engage in alternative dispute resolution”. Note that the stay or order might be in contemplation of
an ADR process being used to attempt resolution of the entire case or a discrete issue (see the first paragraph of para.14-7);
 
(ii)a stay may relate to the whole or part of the proceedings and be pursuant to the application of the parties or one of them
(r.3.1(2)(g) and r.3.3(1))(see Andrew v Barclays Bank [2012] C.T.L.C. 115 at [24], [28] and [41], Hussain v Chowdhury
[2020] EWHC 790 (Ch) at [18], the Grenfell Tower Litigation: Abdel-Kader v Kensington and Chelsea RLBC [2022]
EWHC 2006 (QB)), and Hamon v University College London [2023] EWHC 1812 (KB);
 
(iii)a stay may also be ordered by the court of its own initiative (r.3.1(2)(g) and r.3.3(1));
 
(iv)by ordering such a stay of its own initiative (r.3.1(2)(g) and r.3.3(1)). An appropriate time to make such an order might
be upon perusal of the parties’ statements about ADR in their directions questionnaires;
 
(v)by ordering such a stay upon the written request of a party or of its own initiative when considering completed directions
questionnaires (r.26.4). (See also Standard Directions Model Paragraph B05-stay for settlement which provides:
 
“1....
 
2.The claim is stayed until xxxx, during which period the parties will attempt to settle the matter or to narrow the issues.
 
3.By 4pm on xxxx the Claimant must notify the court in writing of the outcome of negotiations (without
disclosing any matters which remain subject to “without prejudice” terms) and what, if any, further directions
are sought. Failure to comply with this direction or to engage properly in negotiations may result in the
application of sanctions. If settlement has been reached, the parties must file a consent order signed by all
of them” (see https://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/civil/standard-directions/list-of-cases-of-common-
occurrence/menu-of-sd-paragraphs (B05-ADR.doc)));”
 
(vi)by ordering the parties to consider ADR using, for example a direction in the form of Standard Directions Model
Paragraph A03-ADR.doc, whether at the time of giving standard directions or otherwise as follows:
 
“1....
 
2.At all stages the parties must consider settling this litigation by any means of Alternative Dispute Resolution
(including Mediation); any party not engaging in any such means proposed by another must serve a witness statement
giving reasons within 21 days of that proposal; such witness statement must not be shown to the trial judge until
questions of costs arise.
 
3.‘21 days’ can be altered manually. The words ‘and not less than 28 days before trial’ can always
be added after the word ‘proposal’ by the managing judge if appropriate. Not necessary for every
Order.” (See https://www.justice.gov.uk/courts/procedure-rules/civil/standard-directions/list-of-cases-of-common-
occurrence/menu-of-sd-paragraphs (A03-ADR.doc)). It might be particularly appropriate to consider directions of the
type referred to immediately above when considering cost budgets and proportionality during the costs management
and case management process. Such directions might be combined with directions designed to facilitate the holding
of an immediate mediation. For example, provision could be made for early disclosure of a particular category of

2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
documents that would facilitate a mediation prior to full disclosure. See Mann v Mann [2014] EWHC 537 (Fam);
[2014] 1 W.L.R. 2807; [2014] 2 F.L.R. 928 at [525]. In respect of directions for a stay in boundary disputes see the
observations about Bradley v Heslin [2014] EWHC 3267 (Ch) in para.14-7 above;”
 
(vii)by ensuring that the opportunity to explore ADR prospects is not prejudiced by the rigours of case management
procedures generally. (For example, see Electrical Waste Recycling Group Ltd v Philips Electronics UK Ltd [2012] EWHC
38 (Ch) where the court considered how ordering a split trial might impact on the prospects of mediating the matter.) In
CIP Properties (AIPT) Ltd v Galliford Try Infrastructure Ltd [2014] EWHC 3546 (TCC); [2015] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 765;
156 Con. L.R. 202, Coulson J suggested “A timetable for trial that allows the parties to take part in ADR along the way
is a sensible case management tool”;
 
(viii)by acting as a source of information about professional and commercial bodies providing ADR services (for example,
see https://civilmediation.org/about-mediation;
 
(ix)by verbally encouraging the parties to consider ADR at a hearing or telephone conference, such as a case management
conference or a pre-trial review;
 
(x)by making an order, whether on directions for allocation or a later stage, of the type referred to in the Multi-Track
Practice Direction (sometimes referred to as an “Ungley Order”) (29PD4.10(9);
 
(xi)by making an ADR order on the basis of the draft in App.7 to the Admiralty and Commercial Courts Guide. The draft
order includes the following paragraph: “4. The parties shall take such serious steps as they may be advised to resolve their
disputes by ADR procedures before the neutral individual or panel so chosen by no later than [*].”;
 
(xii)by making an ADR order on the basis of the draft order in App.E to and Section 7 of the Technology and Construction
Court Guide. Although these Guides refer to their particular courts there appears to be no reason why the type of ADR
orders made in these courts could not be made, where appropriate, in other courts;
 
(xiii)by ordering Early Neutral Evaluation. See CPR r.3.1(2)(p) and Lomax v Lomax [2019] EWCA Civ 1467; [2019] 1
W.L.R. 6527;
 
(xiv)by, in a case which is suitable to be resolved by an ADR procedure except for one sticking point, ordering the hearing
of that point as a preliminary issue with a view to the case then being referred to ADR (see s.8 of the Technology and
Construction Court Guide, again there is no reason why the approach taken by the Technology and Construction Court
cannot be taken by other courts, where appropriate);
 
(xv)by, ordering a stay for mediation followed, if necessary, by either an order for mediation or for compulsory early
neutral evaluation. Such a tiered approach was suggested by HHJ Stephen Davies as part of a streamlined proportionate
procedure for domestic property renovation building contract disputes in the Sky's the Limit Transformations Ltd v Mirza
[2022] EWHC 29 (TCC);
 
(xvi)by arranging, in the Admiralty and Commercial Court or the Technology and Construction Court, for the court to
provide Early Neutral Evaluation. Further, in the Technology and Construction Court the court can provide a judge to act
as a mediator (see http://www.justice.gov.uk/downloads/courts/tech-court/tech-con-court-guide.pdf);
 
(xvii)by arranging or, where appropriate, ordering, in the Business and Property Courts, a mediation, an Early Neutral
Evaluation or a Chancery Financial Dispute Resolution (“Chancery FDR”) (Chancery Guide, Ch.18.);
 
(xviii)by refusing a party’s application to the court unless and until ADR is attempted. See Hussain v Chowdhury [2020]
EWHC 790 (Ch) at [18] where HHJ Jarman QC refused to give permission to commence charity proceedings until the
parties “engaged in a meaningful way in mediation with a professional mediator”. See also Jaffer v Jaffer [2021] EWHC
1329 (Ch). Another example is Wilmington Trust SP Services (Dublin) Ltd v Spicejet Ltd [2021] EWHC 1117 (Comm)
where the court considered (at [74]):

2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
“… that the course most conducive to the furtherance of the overriding objective and the interests of justice
(was) to give judgment for the First Claimant’s undisputed claims but to stay execution. In that way, the entire
dispute can be brought within the ambit of any ADR procedures that the parties may choose to adopt”
;
 
(xix)by making an appropriate costs order (or advising that such an order might be made in the future) in respect of failure
to give adequate consideration to ADR prior to the commencement of proceedings;
 
(xx) by providing information about PD 36V regarding the Family Mediation Voucher Scheme, which is designed to offer
a financial contribution of £500 towards mediation costs for eligible cases: Family Procedure Rules 2010 (SI 2010/2955)
r.36.2;
 
(xxi)by referring a small claim to the Small Claims Mediation Service.
Case management: the stages at which ADR may be encouraged
14-9
The issue of timing, as in when is the best stage of a case to use an ADR procedure, is often a complex question.
Clearly, there is a duty on the parties to consider ADR pre-proceedings in accordance with the relevant pre-action protocol
(see para.14-2).
In Nigel Witham Ltd v Smith [2008] EWHC 12, (TCC); [2008] T.C.L.R. 3; 117 Con. L.R. 117 Judge Peter Coulson QC offered
general guidance saying that a premature mediation simply wasted time and could sometimes lead to a hardening of positions
on both sides whereas, conversely, a delay in any mediation until after full particulars and documents had been exchanged
could mean that the costs that had been incurred to get to that point became themselves the principal obstacle to a successful
mediation. He added:
“The trick in many cases was to identify the happy medium: the point when the detail of the claim and the response
were known to both sides, but before the costs that had been incurred in reaching that stage were so great that
a settlement was no longer possible.”
The relevance of escalating costs was highlighted by Ward LJ in Shovelar v Lane [2011] EWCA Civ 802; [2012] 1 W.L.R. 637;
[2011] 4 All E.R. 66. He said, at [61]:
“If the claimants are right in their assessment of their costs, then, even without a success fee, the costs incurred
by them exceed the sum over which battle has been joined. The great British public must think that something
has gone wrong somewhere if litigation is conducted in that way. I share that sense of horror. One answer has to
be to engage in mediation constructively and at the very earliest stage.”
Similarly, in Matthews v Matthews [2018] EWHC 906 (Fam), Holman J stated at [28]:
“As this case is now going off again for a period, I wish very strongly indeed to stress to both parties (as will
be recorded on the face of my formal order today) that this case urgently requires to be resolved before costs
and delay become disproportionate. In the exercise of my powers and duties under the overriding objective under
rule 1 of the Civil Procedure Rules, I very strongly encourage all the parties to give fresh consideration to seeing
if these issues cannot be resolved by mediation. I am fearful that a considerable amount of money may yet be
expended, which will become completely disproportionate to the size and value of the claim.”

2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
In Hamon v University College London [2023] EWHC 1812 (KB) Senior Master Fontaine added at [66]:
“The most important considerations are that both parties know the other parties' case, so that the litigation risk
can be assessed, and that ADR is attempted at a sufficiently early stage to enable costs to be saved, so that parties
are not discouraged from settlement by the extent of incurred costs.”
Masood Ahmed, University of Leicester has opined:
“The ADR duty is an on-going one and as such litigating parties are required to actively engage in an ADR
dialogue. This on-going duty and dialogue will mean that, if the matter is not ripe for ADR at a particular time, it
may be at a later stage when the issues have matured. Therefore, in exercising its discretion on costs, the courts
should only penalise a party when it is clear that a party has clearly failed to respond to an invitation to ADR; to
engage in a constructive ADR dialogue or where its behaviour is such that it undermines or frustrates the parties’
ADR duty.” (“The ADR duty and costs: Ali v Channel 5 Broadcast Ltd” [2018] EWHC 298 (Ch); C.J.Q. 2018
at 37(4), 407–412.)
The first main opportunity the court has to consider ADR is at the allocation stage. One of the matters a court may then consider,
in the context of ADR, is whether the parties have complied with the ADR provisions of any relevant pre-action protocol. The
court will also consider the parties’ directions questionnaire forms. (See Form N150 (directions questionnaire), Section A.)
CPR r.26.4 provides that a party, when completing the directions questionnaire required by r.26.3, may make a written request
for the proceedings to be stayed while the parties try to settle the case by alternative dispute resolution or other means.
Section A of the directions questionnaire, under the heading “Settlement”, states: “Under the Civil Procedure Rules parties
should make every effort to settle their case before the hearing”. This could be by discussion or negotiation (such as a roundtable
meeting or settlement conference) or by a more formal process such as mediation. The court will want to know what steps have
been taken. Settling the case early can save costs, including court hearing fees.
Legal representatives are asked to confirm that they have explained to their client the need to try to settle, the options available,
and the possibility of costs sanctions if they refuse to try to settle. The form then poses three questions, noting that answers
will be considered in the context of CPR r.44.3(4):
“1) Given that the rules require you to try to settle the claim before the hearing do you want to attempt to settle
at this stage? 2) If Yes, do you want a one month stay? 3) If you answered ‘No’ to question 1, please state below
the reasons why you consider it inappropriate to try to settle the claim at this stage.”
The issue of timing is always an issue, and will differ from case to case. There will be occasions when it is clear to the parties and
the court that a case is ready for mediation. On other occasions it is the circumstances of the litigation that may make mediation
appropriate. For example, where a court is considering making a costs management order; it may be the view of the court that
it is likely to be cost effective and proportionate to stay the case for mediation immediately on the basis that it may ultimately
prove to be unnecessary to make such an order. On the other hand, where the claim or defence involves some complexity, the
court may want to see a matter properly pleaded before mediation is attempted: Williams v Seals [2014] EWHC 3708 (Ch);
[2015] W.T.L.R. 339, Richards J at [48].
In CIP Properties (AIPT) Ltd v Galliford Try Infrastructure Ltd [2014] EWHC 3546 (TCC); [2015] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 765;
156 Con. L.R. 202 Coulson J put the emphasis on the parties consensually agreeing on the best time to mediate, suggesting: “A
timetable for trial that allows the parties to take part in ADR along the way is a sensible case management tool.” He added “A
stay or a fixed ‘window’ is likely to lead to delay, extra cost and uncertainty, and should not ordinarily be ordered.”
CPR r.29.2 states that, when it allocates a case to the multi-track, the court will give case management directions. This provision
is supplemented by paras 4.1 to 4.11 of Practice Direction (The Multi-Track) (see Vol.1, para.29PD.4). Paragraph 4.10 states
the general approach that the court will adopt where it gives directions on its own initiative without holding a case management
conference and is not aware of any steps taken by the parties other that the exchange of statements of case. Subparagraph (9) of
para.4.10 states that a direction requiring the parties to consider ADR is included among the directions that the court may give
in these circumstances and sets out the form of Order, known as an “Ungley Order” which may be made; this is as follows:

2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
“The parties shall by [the date determined by the court] consider whether the case is capable of resolution by ADR.
If any party considers that the case is unsuitable for resolution by ADR, that party shall be prepared to justify that
decision at the conclusion of the trial, should the judge consider that such means of resolution were appropriate,
when he is considering the appropriate costs order to make. The party considering the case unsuitable for ADR
shall, not less than 28 days before the commencement of the trial, file with the court a witness statement without
prejudice, save as to costs, giving reasons upon which they rely for saying that the case was unsuitable.”
A variation on the above requires a more immediate statement of parties’ intentions concerning ADR:
The parties shall by [14 days from the date of this order] consider whether the claim is capable of being resolved by Alternative
Dispute Resolution and:
 
a)if either party considers that the claim is unsuitable for Alternative Dispute Resolution, that party shall, not less than 28
days from today, serve on the other party a witness statement giving the reasons upon which that party relies in saying
the claim is unsuitable;
 
b)a party served with such a statement may within 14 days after receiving it serve on the other party a witness statement
in response;
 
c)all witness statements so served shall be disclosed to the trial judge at, but not until, the conclusion of the trial;
 
d)at the conclusion of the trial, when deciding on the appropriate costs order to make, the trial judge shall take all such
witness statements into account in considering whether such means of resolution were appropriate; and
 
e)a party who objected to Alternative Dispute Resolution but has not served such a witness statement may be presumed
to have objected for no good reason.
See also, regarding such directions, Model Paragraph A03-ADR.doc as referred to in para.14-8 above. See also PGF II SA v
OMFS Co [2013] EWCA Civ 1288; [2014] 1 W.L.R. 1386 at [35] et seq where Briggs LJ outlined the desirability of requiring
reasons for refusing ADR being put in writing at the time of the refusal. Failure to provide a written statement, when ordered
to do so, is to invite a costs sanction: BXB v Watch Tower and Bible Tract Society of Pennsylvannia [2020] EWHC 656 (QB).
Note that CPR r.29.2(1A) provides, with effect from 1 October 2024, that “when giving directions, the court must consider
whether to order or encourage the parties to engage in alternative dispute resolution”.
Case management: healthcare cases involving high emotion
14-10
The benefits of ADR, not least mediation, are not restricted to the savings of costs and court time. ADR, and particularly
mediation, have the potential to play a powerful role in cases involving high personal emotion and tragedy. This was
demonstrated by the case of baby Charlie Gard, which attracted public attention around the world in 2017. It was the court’s
duty, in Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust v Yates [2017] EWHC 1909 (Fam), to consider
whether to confirm declarations previously made that it was in the child’s best interests for artificial ventilation to be withdrawn
and for his treating clinicians to provide him with palliative care only. Francis J explained why, even if the prospects of reaching
agreement between the parties appears impossible, mediation should be used. He said:
“… it is my clear view that mediation should be attempted in all cases such as this one even if all that it does is
achieve a greater understanding by the parties of each other’s positions. Few users of the court system will be in
a greater state of turmoil and grief than parents in the position that these parents have been in and anything which
helps them to understand the process and the viewpoint of the other side, even if they profoundly disagree with
it, would in my judgment be of benefit…”

2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
The passage immediately above was referred to by one of the parties in the Grenfell Tower Litigation in support of a submission
for a stay for ADR [2022] EWHC 2006 (QB) at [54]. This advice has been noted. For example, in X (A Child), Re v [2020]
EWHC 1958 (Fam) Ms Justice Russell DBE reported that:
“... the Court had to insist that mediation was imperative, both to assist in narrowing the issues to be decided, and
to reduce the levels of distress for this family.”
See also Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust v H (A Child) [2022] EWCOP 14 (Hayden J, pp.25):
“The availability of such a (mediation) service strikes me as having invaluable potential, even where it doesn’t
achieve its stated objectives. It may for example, establish a greater respect for and understanding of different
views. This in turn may defuse some distress and anger and benefit the parties in the court process that follows.”
Re NR (A Child) (Withholding CPR) [2024] EWHC 61 (Fam) at [39] and Mrs R v King's College Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust [2024] EWHC 2400 (Fam) at [29].
Case management: where a public authority is a party
14-11
In R. (Cowl) v Plymouth City Council [2001] EWCA Civ 1935; [2002] 1 W.L.R. 803, CA, the Court of Appeal noted that, in
disputes between public authorities and members of the public for whom they were responsible, insufficient attention is being
paid to the paramount importance of saving cost and reducing delay by avoiding recourse to the application for judicial review
procedure (This point was cited with approval in Hamon v University College London [2023] EWHC 1812 (KB) at [50]). The
court said that the High Court should scrutinise extremely carefully such applications and should use its powers to ensure that
the parties tried to resolve their dispute with the minimum involvement of the court. To achieve that objective, the court might
have to hold (of its own initiative) a hearing at which the parties could explain what steps they had taken to resolve or reduce
their dispute by means alternative to the procedure. In Practice Statement (Admin Ct: Administration of Justice) v [2002] 1
W.L.R. 810, QBD (sub nom Practice Statement (Admin Ct: Annual Statement) [2002] 1 All E.R. 633), the lead judge of the
Administrative Court drew attention to the Cowl case and stated that the judges of that court “were fully committed to resolving
disputes by alternative means where appropriate and are exploring ways of promoting this”. It has since been suggested, in
Halsey, that the issue of public money is not a special factor and that the list of factors outlined in Halsey determine when it
is reasonable to refuse ADR.
See also R. (Essex CC) v Secretary of State for Education [2016] EWHC 1724 (Admin), where the parties were criticised for
not compromising the litigation. The court said that there was no reason why mediation or others forms of alternative dispute
resolution should not have a role in judicial review cases which did not raise any recurring principle or policy.
In JR138's Application for Judicial Review [2022] NIQB 46, an application in Northern Ireland, the court identified the case as
an example of litigation coming before the court with increasing frequency. This was where a person in need contends that a
health and social care trust is not providing them with the services to which they are entitled and which they desperately need.
The court analysed (at [39]) why it was often unable to be of significant assistance in such matters and urged parties dealing
with these issues to give serious consideration to mediation.
Case management: miscellaneous
14-12
CPR r.3.1(2) states that the court’s general powers of case management include the power to order that a party or a party’s legal
representative be required to attend the court. Such an order may be made with a view to making an ADR order (though the

2. - ADR and Case Management, UKBC-WHITEBK 549319339 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
attendance of any party is not required for this purpose) or to otherwise facilitate settlement, but should not be made for the
purpose of putting pressure on the party to discontinue the proceedings (Tarajan Overseas Ltd v Kaye [2001] EWCA Civ 1859).
Although the court has jurisdiction to order that parties should be adequately represented at a mediation, it has no jurisdiction
to order that a particular person should attend, especially where that person was not a party to the proceedings (Shirayama
Shokusan Co Ltd v Danovo Ltd [2004] EWHC 390 (Ch); [2004] 1 W.L.R. 2985; (2004) 101(13) L.S.G. 34; (Blackburne J) (D
applying for order staying proceedings until conclusion of mediation attended by a third party (X) as a representative of C,
where D contending that X’s presence was essential to meaningful mediation)).
Case management: adjournment of a trial for ADR
There will rarely be circumstances where a court would be willing to adjourn a trial on the grounds that the parties wish to
use ADR. See Elliott Group Ltd v Gecc UK (formerly GE Capital Corp) [2010] EWHC 409 (TCC).
Case management: mediation and delay
A request for mediation followed by a lengthy discussion will not justify delay: UK Highways A55 Ltd v Hyder Consulting
(UK) Ltd [2012] EWHC 3505 (TCC).
Case management: purpose of mediation
A party should not be required to mediate merely for the purpose of finding out the other party’s case: Brooks v Armstrong
[2016] EWHC 2893 (Ch).
In a housing dispute, it would be wrong for a social landlord to use recourse to mediation as a delaying tactic having the effect
of causing a tenant to lose priority status for housing (Robinson v Hammersmith and Fulham London BC [2006] EWCA Civ
1122; [2006] 1 W.L.R. 3295; [2007] H.L.R. 7, CA).
As to ADR in the Court of Appeal, see Vol.1 para.52.0.11.
For use of ADR procedures for purpose of resolving conflict of expert evidence in lease renewal claims, see commentary in
para.56PD.1.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
