Regulation 19. - Variation and late determination of..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Regulation 19. - Variation and late determination of amount of
costs
White Book 2025
Volume 2
Section 7 - Legal Representatives—Costs and Litigation Funding
Section 7D - Legal Aid
Regulations under the Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
Civil Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013
Part 3 Costs Orders Against a Legally Aided Party and the Lord Chancellor
19.— Variation and late determination of amount of costs
7D-122+
(1) This regulation applies where the court makes a section 26(1) costs order.
(2) Where the amount (if any) which the legally aided party is required to pay under the section 26(1) costs order,
together with the amount which the Lord Chancellor is required to pay under any costs order against the Lord
Chancellor, is less than the full costs, the receiving party may, on the ground set out in paragraph (4)(a), apply to
the court for an order varying the amount which the legally aided party is required to pay under the section 26(1)
costs order.
(3) The receiving party may, on any of the grounds set out in paragraph (4), apply for a determination of the amount
that the legally aided party is required to pay where—
(a) the receiving party has not, within the time limit in regulation 16(2), applied to have that amount determined
in accordance with regulation 16; and
(b) the court has not specified the amount to be paid under the section 26(1) costs order.
(4) The grounds referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) are that—
(a) there has been a significant change in the legally aided party’s circumstances since the date of the order;
(b) material additional information as to the legally aided party’s resources is available, and that information
could not with reasonable diligence have been obtained by the receiving party in time to make an application
in accordance with regulation 16; or
(c) there is a good reason for the receiving party’s delay in making the request within the time limit under
regulation 16(2).
(5) Any application under paragraph (2) or (3) must be made by the receiving party within six years from the date
on which the section 26(1) costs order is first made.

Regulation 19. - Variation and late determination of..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
(6) On any application under paragraph (2), the amount that the legally aided party is required to pay under the section
26(1) costs order may be varied as the court thinks fit, but the amount of costs ordered (excluding any costs ordered
to be paid under paragraph (9)) must not exceed the amount of the full costs.
(7) When the amount which the legally aided party is required to pay under the section 26(1) costs order has been
determined under regulation 15(2)(a), and the receiving party applies under paragraph (2) for an order varying that
amount—
(a) the receiving party must file with the application under paragraph (2) that party’s bill of costs, which must
comply with any requirements of relevant rules of court relating to the form and content of a bill of costs where
the court is assessing a party’s costs; and
(b) the court must, when determining the application, assess the full costs.
(8) Where civil legal services have been provided to the receiving party in relation to the proceedings, the Lord
Chancellor may make an application under paragraph (2) or (3), and—
(a) when making the application the Lord Chancellor must file with the court a statement of the receiving party’s
costs or, if those costs have not been assessed, the receiving party’s bill of costs; and
(b) paragraphs (4) and (5) apply to that application as if “the Lord Chancellor” were substituted for “the receiving
party” in those paragraphs.
(9) The amount of costs to be determined under this regulation may include the costs incurred in relation to an
application made under this regulation.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
