Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the Legal
Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 Issued by
the Senior Costs Judge
White Book 2025  | Commentary last updated December 3, 2015
Volume 2
Section 7 - Legal Representatives—Costs and Litigation Funding
Section 7D - Legal Aid
Regulations under the Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act
2012 Issued by the Senior Costs Judge
Introduction
1.1
7D-125
On 1 April 2013 section 26 of the Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (the Act) replaced section
11 of the Access to Justice Act 1999 (see Appendix 1).
1.2
These guidance notes (which have been approved by the Master of the Rolls) are intended to assist judges, litigants and
lawyers dealing with cases in the Court of Appeal, the High Court and in the County Court.
1.3
In these notes the expression legally aided party means an individual or legal person to whom, in relation to relevant
proceedings, civil legal services have been made available under Part 1 of the Act.
Section 26 of the Act
2.1
7D-126
The full text of Section 26 of the Act is set out in Appendix 1, below. Section 26(1) provides that costs ordered against
an individual who is a legally aided party in relevant civil proceedings must not exceed the amount (if any) which it is
reasonable for that party to pay having regard to all the circumstances, including (a) the financial resources of all of the

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
parties to the proceedings, and (b) their conduct in connection with the dispute to which the proceedings relate. This is
known as “cost protection”.
2.2
The Civil Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013 make provision about costs orders in civil proceedings in favour of or
against a legally aided party, and, in certain circumstances, against the Lord Chancellor. Part 2 of the Regulations makes
exceptions to the general principle of cost protection in relation to certain forms of civil legal aid and in certain family
proceedings. Provision is also made in relation to the periods to which cost protection applies and when it comes to an end.
2.3
Part 3 of the Regulations (see Appendix 2) sets out the rules governing costs orders against a legally aided party to
proceedings. Regulation 10 sets out the grounds on which a cost order might also be made against the Lord Chancellor
where civil legal aid has been provided to a party to proceedings. Regulations 11 to 20 make provision in relation to the
procedure, determination and enforcement of costs orders against a legally aided party and the Lord Chancellor.
2.4
Part 4 of the Regulations sets out the principles to be applied when a costs order or a cost agreement is made in favour
of a legally aided party.
2.5
Attention is drawn to Section 26(6)(d): the power to require payment by the Lord Chancellor of the whole or part of any
costs incurred by a party to whom civil legal services are not made available under Part 1 of the Act, is governed by the
2013 Regulations rather than by the Statute itself.
2.6
Under the Regulations the function of deciding whether or not a costs order could and should be made is carried out by the
Court , defined by Regulation 2(1) of the 2013 Regulations as; “any tribunal having the power to award costs in favour
of, or against a party”.
Cost Protection
3.1
7D-127
Cost protection is defined in the Regulations as: “the limit on costs awarded against a legally aided party in relevant civil
proceedings set out in Section 26(1) and (2) of the Act”. By Part 2 of the Regulations, cost protection only applies to
costs incurred by the receiving party in relation to proceedings which are, as regards the legally aided party, relevant civil
proceedings (or contemplated proceedings) before a Court.

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
3.2
Cost protection does not apply to parts of proceedings for which civil legal services are provided in the form of help at Court;
legal help, help with family mediation or family help (lower) (except as described below); parts of family proceedings for
which civil legal services are provided in the form of family help (higher); or legal representation.
3.3
Cost protection does apply where a legally aided party receives legal help, help with family mediation or family help (lower)
in relation to proceedings (other than family proceedings) and later receives family help (higher) or legal representation
in respect of the same proceedings.
3.4
Cost protection applies in respect of costs incurred by the receiving party during the period in which civil legal services
are being provided, whether before or after the commencement of the proceedings. Subject to the exception in respect of
family help described above and in the circumstances relating to emergency representation described below, cost protection
does not apply to costs incurred by the receiving party before the date of issue of a certificate; after the date on which a
determination that the legally aided party qualified for civil legal services has been withdrawn; or before, at the time of,
or after the date of revocation of a determination.
3.5
Where the Director makes a determination about emergency representation (other than a determination in relation to family
proceedings to which costs protection does not apply), cost protection applies to costs incurred before the making of that
determination if the application for emergency representation could not be made because the office to which the application
would ordinarily be made was closed; and the provider made the application at the first available opportunity.
Costs orders against a legally aided party and the
Lord Chancellor
4.1
7D-128
Part 3 of the Regulations applies where cost protection applies. Where relevant proceedings are finally decided in favour
of a non legally aided party the Court may, subject to certain conditions, make an order for the payment by the Lord
Chancellor to the non legally aided party of the whole or any part of the costs incurred by that party in the proceedings,
other than the costs that the legally aided party is required to pay under a Section 26(1) costs order.
4.2
The conditions which must be satisfied before an order against the Lord Chancellor may be made are:

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
 
(a)a Section 26(1) Order is made against the legally aided party in the proceedings and the amount (if any) which the
legally aided party is required to pay is less than the amount of the full costs;
 
(b)the non legally aided party makes a request for a hearing to determine the amount to be paid by the legally aided
party within three months of the date on which the Section 26(1) costs order is made; or after the expiry of the time
limit, where there is a good reason for the delay in the request being made;
 
(c)in the case of costs incurred in a Court of first instance: the proceedings were instituted by the legally aided party,
the non legally aided party is an individual, and the Court is satisfied that the non legally aided party will suffer
financial hardship unless the order is made; and
 
(d)in any case the Court is satisfied that it is just and equitable in the circumstances that provision for the costs should
be made out of public funds.
4.3
Where the non legally aided party is acting in a representative, fiduciary or official capacity and is entitled to be indemnified
in respect of costs from any property, estate or fund the Court must, for the purposes of determining whether the above
conditions are satisfied have regard to the value of the property, estate or fund and the resources of any person who has
a beneficial interest in that property, estate or fund.
4.4
Where the legally aided party receives civil legal services in connection with only part of the proceedings, the reference to
the costs incurred by the non legally aided party is to be construed as a reference to so much of those costs as is attributable
to the part of the proceedings for which civil legal aid services are provided.
Editorial note
7D-129 Costs incurred in a period when the proceedings were not funded proceedings will not be recoverable from the Lord Chancellor:
Rayner v Lord Chancellor [2015] EWCA Civ 1124. The court also expressed the view that the legally aided party will not have
costs protection in respect of costs incurred in that period.
4.5
7D-130
Where a Court decides any proceedings in favour of a non legally aided party, and an appeal lies against that decision, any
order for payment of costs by the legally aided party or Lord Chancellor does not take effect:
 
(a)where permission to appeal is required, unless the time limit for an application for permission expires without an
application being made;
 
(b)where an application for permission is made within the time limit, unless the application is refused; or
 
(c)where permission to appeal is granted or is not required, unless the time limit for appeal expires without an appeal
being brought.

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
4.6
When the Court is considering whether the conditions set out above have been satisfied, the Court must have regard to the
resources of the non legally aided party and of that party’s partner, but must not have regard to the resources of the partner
if that partner has a contrary interest in the proceedings.
4.7
The procedures for determining the liability of a legally aided party under a Section 26(1) costs order and for obtaining
a costs order against the Lord Chancellor are set out at Regulations 9 to 20 of the 2013 Regulations. The full text of Part
3 of the Regulations is set out at Appendix 2.
The Procedure
5.1
7D-131
In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex Parte Gunn [2001] EWCA Civ 891 the Master of the Rolls gave the
judgment of the Court and set out the procedure to be followed under s.11 of the Access to Justice Act 1999. The guidance
below is modelled on that procedure with the adjustments required to reflect the 2012 Act and 2013 Regulations. There
is a two stage process in relation to the recovery of costs in cases to which Section 26(1) of the 2013 Act applies. The
procedure to be followed is to be derived from the 2013 Regulations. The scheme is as follows.
5.2 Stage 1
The first stage involves the Court dealing with the substance of the dispute (the trial Court). The role of the trial Court
is set out in Regulation 15 as follows:
 
(i)To decide whether to make a “Section 26(1) costs order”, defined in the Regulation as “a costs order against a
legally aided party where cost protection applies”.
 
(ii)When making a Section 26(1) costs order the Court must:
 
(a)specify the amount (if any) that the legally aided party is to pay under that order; or
 
(b)not specify the amount to be so paid.
The Court must specify the amount if it considers it has sufficient information to decide what is a reasonable amount
for the legally aided party to pay in accordance with Section 26.
 
(iii)Where the Court makes a Section 26(1) costs order, but does not specify the amount that the legally aided party is
to pay, the determination of the amount is governed by Regulation 16 and falls under Stage 2. But the Court making
the order may also:
 
(a)make findings of fact (as to the parties’ conduct in connection with the dispute to which the proceedings relate
or otherwise) relevant to the determination of that amount at Stage 2; and
 
(b)order a payment on account pursuant to Regulation 17 if it has sufficient information to decide the minimum
amount which the legally aided party is likely to be ordered to pay on a determination at Stage 2.

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
 
(iv)Where an order is made for payment on account, it must order the legally aided party to make the payment
into Court, and the money must remain in Court pending the determination proceedings under Regulation 16. If the
receiving party fails to commence such proceedings within the time permitted, the payment on account must be repaid
to the legally aided party. A specimen order is at Appendix 3.
Stage 2
Stage 2 consists of the procedure to be followed to ascertain the amount of costs to be paid by the legally aided party
against whom the trial Court has made an order that does not specify the amount. Stage 2 also includes the procedure for
determining whether an order for costs should be made against the Lord Chancellor. The procedure is governed in both
cases by Regulation 16.
5.3
The functions of the Court in relation to Stage 2 will generally be exercised in practice by a Costs Judge or a District Judge.
5.4
The procedure under Stage 2 is as follows:
 
(i)The party in whose favour the costs order has been made (“the receiving party”) may, within three months of the
making of the costs order, request a hearing to determine the costs payable to him.
 
(ii)The receiving party may, at the same time, seek a costs order against the Lord Chancellor.
 
(iii)The receiving party must, when making the request, file with the Court and serve on the legally aided party and
the Lord Chancellor (if an order is sought against the Lord Chancellor):
 
(a)A bill of costs;
 
(b)A statement of resources (unless the Court is determining an application against the Lord Chancellor, and the
costs were not incurred at first instance);
 
(c)A written notice that a costs order is sought against the Lord Chancellor.
 
(iv)The legally aided party must file a statement of resources and serve this on the receiving party and the Lord
Chancellor (where a claim is made against the Lord Chancellor).
 
(v)The Court sets a date for the hearing.
 
(vi)The Court conducts the hearing, assesses the costs (if any) to be paid by the legally aided party and, where
appropriate, makes a costs order against the Lord Chancellor.
A specimen order for costs for use by the Court is set out in Appendix 4, below.
Applying the “Just and Equitable” Test
6.1

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
7D-132
Paragraphs 4.1 to 4.7 above set out the conditions which must be satisfied before an order against the Lord Chancellor
may be made. In ex parte Gunn the Court of Appeal expressed the view that the well established meaning of “just and
equitable” did not require change by reason of the introduction of the Regulations which require the Court to have regard
to the resources of the non legally aided party. In Courts of first instance the Court must be satisfied that the proceedings
were instituted by the legally aided party and that the non legally aided party will suffer financial hardship unless the order
is made. The statement of resources filed by the non legally aided party in accordance with Regulation 16(3)(b) may be
of relevance to the just and equitable test but the Court of Appeal found that the requirement to provide a statement of
resources was not intended to modify the practice based on the authorities in relation to applications in Courts other than
Courts of first instance. The Court of Appeal went on to state:
 
“50.It seems to us that this practice reflects reasoning that it will normally be just and equitable that
when a costs order is made against a party who has been supported by public funds, the costs covered by
the order should, insofar as they cannot be recovered from the funded party, be defrayed out of public
funds.”
6.2
It is not open to the Court making the initial award of costs to make an order for costs against the Lord Chancellor.
Regulation 15(7) does, however, permit the Court awarding costs to make findings of fact relevant to the determination of
the amount to be paid by the legally aided party. In ex parte Gunn the Court of Appeal considered that it must also be open
to the trial Court to make any findings in relation to the conduct of the parties or facts that have emerged in the course of
the proceedings, that have relevance to the application of the just and equitable test.
Costs Orders in Favour of a Public Body
7.1
7D-133
Is it appropriate for the Court to make an order against the Lord Chancellor in favour of a public body? This question will
not arise in practice as regards costs incurred in a Court of first instance since, in such cases, the public body is not an
individual. As regards costs of appeals, the financial hardship test does not apply. In Ex parte Gunn the Court of Appeal
made it clear that it could detect no change in legislative intent in relation to the jurisdiction to make an order in favour of
a public body and concluded that there is jurisdiction to make an order against the Lord Chancellor in favour of a public
body even if it is a Government Department.
7.2
The Court referred to the judgment of Lord Woolf MR in Re O (A Minor) (Costs: Liability of Legal Aid Board) [1997]
1 F.L.R. 465 at page 470G:
“If the Court comes to a conclusion that in those circumstances it would make the hypothetical order for
costs [what is now a section 26(1) order] then in the case of an appeal the Court will usually conclude, in the
absence of some special circumstance, that for the purposes of s.18(4)(c) [of the Legal Aid Act 1988], it is just
and equitable to make an order. Contrary to [counsel’s] submission, a local authority, because it is a public
body, is not at a disadvantage as compared with any other litigant in seeking an order against the Board.”

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
7.3
The Court of Appeal considered that the practice laid down in Re O should be followed by Courts when applications are
made to them for costs against the Lord Chancellor, in respect of appeal costs incurred by non legally aided parties even
if they are Government Departments. The Court should proceed on the premise that it is just and equitable that the Lord
Chancellor should stand behind the legally aided party unless there are circumstances which render that result unjust or
inequitable.
Transitional Provisions
8.1
7D-134
Generally the 2012 Act and the 2013 Regulations will apply to cases in which funding was first applied for after 1 April
2013 and the 1999 Access to Justice Act (or the Legal Aid Act 1988) and the 2000 Regulations will continue to apply to
cases in which funding was applied for before that date. However there are specific transitional provisions for different
categories of funding applied for before and continuing after 1 April 2013. For the full transitional provisions see the Legal
Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (Consequential, Transitional and Saving Provisions) Regulations
2013 (as amended).
Appendix 1
Section 26
Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 Section 26
26.— Costs in civil proceedings
7D-135
(1) Costs ordered against an individual in relevant civil proceedings must not exceed the amount (if any) which
it is reasonable for the individual to pay having regard to all the circumstances, including—
(a) the financial resources of all of the parties to the proceedings, and
(b) their conduct in connection with the dispute to which the proceedings relate.
(2) In subsection (1) “relevant civil proceedings” , in relation to an individual, means—
(a) proceedings for the purposes of which civil legal services are made available to the individual under
this Part, or
(b) if such services are made available to the individual under this Part for the purposes of only part of
proceedings, that part of the proceedings.

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
(3) Regulations may make provision for exceptions from subsection (1).
(4) In assessing for the purposes of subsection (1) the financial resources of an individual to whom civil legal
services are made available, the following must not be taken into account, except so far as prescribed—
(a) the individual’s clothes and household furniture, and
(b) the implements of the individual’s trade.
(5) Subject to subsections (1) to (4), regulations may make provision about costs in relation to proceedings for
the purposes of which civil legal services are made available under this Part.
(6) Regulations under subsection (5) may, in particular, make provision—
(a) specifying the principles to be applied in determining the amount of any costs which may be awarded
against a party to whom civil legal services are made available under this Part,
(b) limiting the circumstances in which, or the extent to which, an order for costs may be enforced against
such a party,
(c) as to the cases in which, and the extent to which, such a party may be required to give security for costs
and the manner in which it is to be given,
(d) requiring the payment by the Lord Chancellor of the whole or part of any costs incurred by a party to
whom civil legal services are not made available under this Part,
(e) specifying the principles to be applied in determining the amount of costs which may be awarded to a
party to whom civil legal services are made available under this Part,
(f) as to the court, tribunal or other person by whom the amount of any costs is to be determined, and
(7) Regulations may provide that an individual is to be treated, for the purposes of subsection (1) or regulations
under subsection (3) or (5), as having or not having financial resources of a prescribed description (but such
regulations have effect subject to subsection (4)).
(8) Regulations under subsection (7) may, in particular, provide that the individual is to be treated as having
prescribed financial resources of a person of a prescribed description.
(9) Regulations under this section may include provision requiring information and documents to be provided.
Appendix 2
Regulation 9
The Civil Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013 Pt 3—Costs Order Against a Legally Aided Party and the Lord
Chancellor
9.— Effect of this Part
7D-136

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
(1) This Part applies where cost protection applies.
(2) The court may not, except in accordance with this Part, make an order requiring the Lord Chancellor to
pay the whole or part of any costs incurred by a non-legally aided party because the proceedings are relevant
proceedings as regards another party.
10.— Costs order against the Lord Chancellor
(1) This regulation applies where relevant proceedings are finally decided in favour of a non-legally aided party.
(2) Subject to paragraphs (3) to (8), the court may make an order for the payment by the Lord Chancellor to the
non-legally aided party of the whole or any part of the costs incurred by that party in the proceedings (other than
the costs that the legally aided party is required to pay under a section 26(1) costs order).
(3) An order under paragraph (2) may only be made if the following conditions are satisfied—
(a) a section 26(1) costs order is made against the legally aided party in the proceedings, and the amount
(if any) which the legally aided party is required to pay under that costs order is less than the amount of
the full costs;
(b) the non-legally aided party makes a request—
(i) under regulation 16(2), within three months of the date on which the section 26(1) costs order is
made; or
(ii) after the expiry of the time limit under regulation 16(2), where there is a good reason for the delay
in the request being made;
(c) as regards costs incurred in a court of first instance, the following conditions are met—
(i) the proceedings were instituted by the legally aided party;
(ii) the non-legally aided party is an individual; and
(iii) the court is satisfied that the non-legally aided party will suffer financial hardship unless the order
is made; and
(d) in any case, the court is satisfied that it is just and equitable in the circumstances that provision for the
costs should be made out of public funds.
(4) Where the legally aided party receives civil legal services in connection with only part of the proceedings,
the reference in paragraph (2) to the costs incurred by the non-legally aided party in the proceedings is to be
construed as a reference to so much of those costs as is attributable to the part of the proceedings for which civil
legal services are provided.
(5) Where a court decides any proceedings in favour of a nonlegally aided party and an appeal lies (with or
without permission) against that decision, any order made under this regulation must not take effect—
(a) where permission to appeal is required, unless the time limit for an application for permission to appeal
expires without such an application being made;
(b) where an application for permission is made within the time limit, unless the application is refused; or
(c) where permission to appeal is granted or is not required, unless the time limit for appeal expires without
an appeal being brought.
(6) Subject to paragraph (7), in determining whether the conditions in paragraph (3)(c)(iii) and (d) are satisfied,
the court must have regard to the resources of the non-legally aided party and of that party’s partner.

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
(7) The court must not have regard to the resources of the partner of the non-legally aided party if the partner
has a contrary interest in the proceedings.
(8) Where the non-legally aided party is acting in a representative, fiduciary or official capacity and is entitled
to be indemnified in respect of costs from any property, estate or fund, the court must, for the purposes of
determining whether the conditions in paragraph (3)(c)(iii) and (d) are satisfied, have regard to the value of the
property, estate or fund and the resources of any person who has a beneficial interest in that property, estate
or fund.
11.— Enforcement of costs order against a legally aided party
Where, for the purpose of enforcing a costs order against a legally aided party who is not a legal person, a charging
order is made under section 1 of the Charging Orders Act 1979 (alone or together with any other judgment or order)
in respect of that party’s interest in the main or only dwelling in which that party resides—
(a) that charging order must operate to secure the amount payable under the costs order (including, without
limitation, any interest) only to the extent of the amount (if any) by which the proceeds of sale of the legally
aided party’s interest in the dwelling (having deducted any mortgage debts) exceed £100,000; and
(b) an order for the sale of the dwelling must not be made in favour of the person in whose favour the charging
order is made.
12.— Security for costs
(1) Where in any proceedings a legally aided party is required to give security for costs, the amount of that security
must not exceed the amount (if any) which is reasonable having regard to all the circumstances, including—
(a) the legally aided party’s resources; and
(b) the legally aided party’s conduct in connection with the dispute to which the proceedings relate.
(2) For the purposes of this regulation, the resources of the legally aided party’s partner are not to be treated as
the resources of the legally aided party.
13.— Assessment of resources
(1) The first £100,000 of the value of the legally aided party’s interest in the main or only dwelling in which
the legally aided party resides must not be taken into account in having regard to that party’s resources for the
purposes of section 26(1) of the Act.
(2) In having regard to the legally aided party’s resources for the purposes of section 26(1) of the Act, the court
may not take into account the legally aided party’s clothes or household furniture, or the implements of that
party’s trade, unless, and if so only to the extent that, the court considers the circumstances of the case are
exceptional, having regard in particular to the quantity or value of the items concerned.
(3) Subject to paragraph (4), in having regard to the resources of a party to the proceedings for the purposes
of section 26(1) of the Act, the resources of the party’s partner are to be treated as the resources of the party
to the proceedings.
(4) The resources of a party’s partner are not to be treated as that party’s resources if the partner has a contrary
interest in the proceedings.
(5) For the purposes of section 26(1) of the Act, where a party is acting in a representative, fiduciary or official
capacity, the court—
(a) subject to sub-paragraph (c), must not take the personal resources of the party acting in such a capacity
into account;

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
(b) must have regard to the value of any property or estate, or the amount of any fund, out of which that
party is entitled to be indemnified; and
(c) may also have regard to the resources of any person who has a beneficial interest in that property, estate
or fund, including, if applicable, that party.
(6) For the purposes of section 26(1) of the Act, where a party is acting as a litigation friend to a legally aided
party, the court must not take the personal resources of the litigation friend into account in assessing the resources
of the legally aided party.
(7) This regulation does not apply in respect of a legally aided party who is a legal person.
14.— Statements of resources
(1) For the purposes of this Part, a statement of resources is a statement, verified by a statement of truth—
(a) made by a party to proceedings, other than a legally aided party who is a legal person, setting out—
(i) the party’s income and capital and financial commitments during the previous year and, if
applicable, those of the party’s partner;
(ii) the party’s estimated future financial resources and expectations and, if applicable, those of the
party’s partner; and
(iii) a declaration stating whether the party, and, if applicable, the party’s partner, have deliberately
forgone or deprived themselves of any resources or expectations, together (if applicable and as far as
is practical) with details of those resources or expectations and the manner in which they have been
forgone or the party or partner deprived of them;
(iv) particulars of any application for legal aid made by the party in connection with the proceedings;
and
(v) any other facts relevant to the determination of the party’s resources; or
(b) made by a legally aided party—
(i) setting out the information previously provided by that party in order to determine that the party’s
financial resources were such that the party was eligible for civil legal services; and
(ii) either stating that there has been no significant change in the party’s financial circumstances since
the date on which the information was provided or, as the case may be, providing details of any such
change.
(2) Any party to proceedings in which another party is a legally aided party may make a statement of resources,
and file it with the court.
(3) A person making and filing a statement of resources under paragraph (2) must serve a copy of it on the
legally aided party.
(4) If the copy of a statement of resources served under paragraph (3) has been served not less than seven days
before the date fixed for a hearing at which the amount to be paid under a section 26(1) costs order falls, or
may fall, to be decided, the legally aided party must also make a statement of resources, and must produce it
at that hearing.
15.— Determination of costs
(1) Where the court is considering whether to make a section 26(1) costs order, it must consider whether—
(a) but for cost protection, it would have made a costs order against the legally aided party; and

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
(b) if so, whether, on making the costs order, it would have specified the amount to be paid under that order.
(2) If the court considers that it would have made a costs order against the legally aided party, but that it would
not have specified the amount to be paid under it, the court must, when making the section 26(1) costs order—
(a) specify the amount (if any) that the legally aided party is to pay under that order if—
(i) it considers that it has sufficient information before it to decide what amount is, in that case, a
reasonable amount for the legally aided party to pay, in accordance with section 26(1) of the Act; and
(ii) it is satisfied that, if it were to determine the full costs at that time, they would exceed the amount
referred to in (i) above; or
(b) not otherwise specify the amount that the legally aided party is to pay under that order.
(3) If the court considers that it would have made a costs order against the legally aided party, and that it would
have specified the amount to be paid under it, the court must, when making the section 26(1) costs order—
(a) If the court considers that it would have made a costs order against the legally aided party, and that it
would have specified the amount to be paid under it, the court must, when making the section 26(1) costs
order—
(b) not otherwise specify the amount the legally aided party is to pay under that order.
(4) Any order made under paragraph (3) must state the amount of the full costs.
(5) Regulation 16 applies to the determination of—
(a) the amount (if any) to be paid by the legally aided party where paragraph (2)(b) or paragraph (3)(b)
applies; and
(b) any application for a costs order against the Lord Chancellor.
(6) Where a determination under regulation 16 follows an order to which paragraph (2)(b) applies, the amount
of the full costs must also be assessed.
(7) Where the court makes a section 26(1) costs order that does not specify the amount which the legally aided
party is to pay under it, it may also make findings of fact (as to the parties’ conduct in connection with the dispute
to which the proceedings relate or otherwise) relevant to the determination of that amount, and those findings
must be taken into consideration in that determination.
16.— Determination of costs where no amount specified
(1) Paragraphs (2) to (12) apply where the amount to be paid under a section 26(1) costs order, or an application
for a costs order against the Lord Chancellor, is to be determined under this regulation in accordance with
regulation 15(5).
(2) Subject to regulations 10(3)(b)(ii) and 19(3), the receiving party may, within three months of the date on
which a section 26(1) costs order is made, request a hearing to determine the amount to be paid to that party.
(3) A request under paragraph (2) must be accompanied by—
(a) if the section 26(1) costs order does not state the full costs, the receiving party’s bill of costs, which
must comply with any requirements of relevant rules of court relating to the form and content of a bill of
costs where the court is assessing a party’s costs;
(b) unless the conditions set out in paragraph (4) are satisfied, a statement of resources; and

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
(c) if the receiving party is seeking a costs order against the Lord Chancellor or may seek such an order
subject to the determination of the amount to be paid under the section 26(1) costs order, written notice
to that effect.
(4) The conditions referred to in paragraph (3)(b) are that—
(a) the court is determining an application for a costs order against the Lord Chancellor; and
(b) the costs were not incurred in a court of first instance.
(5) The receiving party must file the documents referred to in paragraph (3) with the court and at the same time
serve copies of them—
(a) on the legally aided party, if a determination of costs payable under section 26(1) of the Act is sought; and
(b) on the Lord Chancellor, if notice has been given under paragraph (3)(c).
(6) Where documents are served on the legally aided party under paragraph (5)(a), that party must make a
statement of resources.
(7) The legally aided party must, within 21 days of the date of receipt of a copy of the receiving party’s statement
of resources—
(a) file with the court the statement of resources made under paragraph (6);
(b) serve a copy of that statement on the receiving party; and
(c) if notice has been given under paragraph (3)(c), serve a copy of that statement on the Lord Chancellor.
(8) The legally aided party may, at the same time as filing and serving a statement of resources under paragraph
(7), file, and serve on the same persons, a statement setting out any points of dispute in relation to the bill of
costs referred to in paragraph (3)(a).
(9) If the legally aided party, without good reason, fails to file a statement of resources in accordance with
paragraph (7), the court—
(a) must determine the amount which that party is to be required to pay under the section 26(1) costs order
(and, if relevant, the full costs), having regard to the statement made by the receiving party; and
(b) may do so without an oral hearing.
(10) Subject to paragraph (9)(b), the court must set a date for the hearing if—
(a) the legally aided party files a statement of resources in accordance with paragraph (7);
(b) the period for filing the statement under paragraph (7) expires; or
(c) the costs payable by the legally aided party have already been determined.
(11) The court must, at least 14 days before the hearing date, serve notice of the date on—
(a) the receiving party;
(b) the legally aided party (unless the costs payable by that party have already been determined); and

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
(c) if a costs order against the Lord Chancellor is or may be sought, the Lord Chancellor.
(12) The amount of costs to be determined under this regulation may include the costs incurred in relation to
a request under paragraph (2).
17.— Payment on account of costs
(1) Where the court—
(a) makes a section 26(1) costs order but does not specify the amount which the legally aided party is to
pay under it; and
(b) has sufficient information before it to decide the minimum amount which the legally aided party is likely
to be ordered to pay on a determination under regulation 16, the court may order the legally aided party to
pay an amount on account of the costs which are the subject of the order.
(2) The amount of any payment on account of costs must not exceed the minimum amount which the court
decides that the legally aided party is likely to be ordered to pay on a determination under regulation 16.
(3) Where the court orders a legally aided party to make a payment on account of costs—
(a) it must order the legally aided party to make the payment into court; and
(b) the payment must remain in court unless and until the court—
(i) makes a determination under regulation 16 of the amount which the legally aided party should pay
to the receiving party under the section 26(1) costs order, and orders the payment on account or part
of it to be paid to the receiving party in satisfaction or part satisfaction of the legally aided party’s
liability under that order; or
(ii) makes an order under paragraph (4)(b) or (c) that the payment on account or part of it be repaid
to the legally aided party.
(4) Where a legally aided party has made a payment on account of costs pursuant to an order under paragraph
(1)—
(a) the receiving party must request a hearing under regulation 16;
(b) if the receiving party fails to request such a hearing within the time permitted by regulation 16(2), the
payment on account must be repaid to the legally aided party;
(c) if upon the hearing under regulation 16 the amount of costs which it is determined that the legally aided
party should pay is less than the amount of the payment on account, the difference must be repaid to the
legally aided party.
18.— Appeals, etc.
(1) Subject to this regulation and regulation 19, any determination under regulation 15 or regulation 16 is final.
(2) Any party with a financial interest in an assessment of the full costs may appeal against that assessment if,
and to the extent that, the party would but for this Part be entitled to appeal against an assessment of costs by
the court in which the relevant proceedings are taking place.
(3) Where the court has under regulation 15(2)(a) specified an amount which a legally aided party is required
to pay under a section 26(1) costs order, the legally aided party may apply to the court for a determination of
the full costs.

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
(4) If, on a determination under paragraph (3), the amount of the full costs is less than the amount which the
court previously specified under regulation 15(2)(a), the legally aided party must instead be required to pay the
amount of the full costs.
(5) The receiving party or the Lord Chancellor may appeal, on a point of law, against the making of a costs order
against the Lord Chancellor (including the amount of costs which the Lord Chancellor is required to pay under
the order), or, in the case of the receiving party, against the court’s refusal to make such an order.
19.— Variation and late determination of amount of costs
(1) This regulation applies where the court makes a section 26(1) costs order.
(2) Where the amount (if any) which the legally aided party is required to pay under the section 26(1) costs
order, together with the amount which the Lord Chancellor is required to pay under any costs order against the
Lord Chancellor, is less than the full costs, the receiving party may, on the ground set out in paragraph (4)(a),
apply to the court for an order varying the amount which the legally aided party is required to pay under the
section 26(1) costs order.
(3) The receiving party may, on any of the grounds set out in paragraph (4), apply for a determination of the
amount that the legally aided party is required to pay where—
(a) the receiving party has not, within the time limit in regulation 16(2), applied to have that amount
determined in accordance with regulation 16; and
(b) the court has not specified the amount to be paid under the section 26(1) costs order.
(4) The grounds referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) are that—
(a) there has been a significant change in the legally aided party’s circumstances since the date of the order;
(b) material additional information as to the legally aided party’s resources is available, and that information
could not with reasonable diligence have been obtained by the receiving party in time to make an application
in accordance with regulation 16; or
(c) there is a good reason for the receiving party’s delay in making the request within the time limit under
regulation 16(2).
(5) Any application under paragraph (2) or (3) must be made by the receiving party within six years from the
date on which the section 26(1) costs order is first made.
(6) On any application under paragraph (2), the amount that the legally aided party is required to pay under the
section 26(1) costs order may be varied as the court thinks fit, but the amount of costs ordered (excluding any
costs ordered to be paid under paragraph (9)) must not exceed the amount of the full costs.
(7) When the amount which the legally aided party is required to pay under the section 26(1) costs order has been
determined under regulation 15(2)(a), and the receiving party applies under paragraph (2) for an order varying
that amount—
(a) the receiving party must file with the application under paragraph (2) that party’s bill of costs, which
must comply with any requirements of relevant rules of court relating to the form and content of a bill of
costs where the court is assessing a party’s costs; and
(b) the court must, when determining the application, assess the full costs.
(8) Where civil legal services have been provided to the receiving party in relation to the proceedings, the Lord
Chancellor may make an application under paragraph (2) or (3), and—

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
(a) when making the application the Lord Chancellor must file with the court a statement of the receiving
party’s costs or, if those costs have not been assessed, the receiving party’s bill of costs; and
(b) paragraphs (4) and (5) apply to that application as if “the Lord Chancellor” were substituted for “the
receiving party” in those paragraphs.
(9) The amount of costs to be determined under this regulation may include the costs incurred in relation to an
application made under this regulation.
20.— Rights to appear
(1) The Lord Chancellor and the receiving party may appear at—
(a) any hearing in relation to which notice has been given under regulation 16(3)(c);
(b) the hearing of any appeal under regulation 18(5); or
(c) the hearing of any application under regulation 19(8).
(2) The Lord Chancellor may, instead of appearing under paragraph (1), give evidence in the form of a written
statement to the court, verified by a statement of truth.
(3) The Lord Chancellor must file with the court any statement under paragraph (2), and serve a copy on the
receiving party, not less than seven days before the hearing to which it relates.
Specimen Order for Costs Against a Claimant who is a Legally Aided Party
Appendix 3
IT IS ORDERED THAT
 
7D-137
1.The claim is dismissed.
 
2.The full costs of this claim which have been incurred by the defendant are [summarily assessed at £ .......... ] [to
be determined by a Costs Judge or District Judge].
 
3.The claimant (a party to whom civil legal services were made available under Part 1, Legal Aid, Sentencing and
Punishment of Offenders Act 2012) do pay to the Defendant [nil] [£ .......... ] [an amount to be determined by a Costs
Judge or District Judge]. [When determining such costs the Costs Judge or District Judge should take into account
the following facts:
[Here list any findings of fact as to the party’s conduct in the proceedings or otherwise which are relevant
to the determination of the costs payable by the legally aided party]
[Here list any findings of fact as to the party’s conduct in the proceedings or otherwise which are relevant to the
determination of the costs payable by the legally aided party]
 
5.There be a detailed assessment of the costs of the claimant which are payable by the Lord Chancellor under Part
1, Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.
Specimen Order for use by a Costs Judge or District Judge

Guidance Notes on the Application of Section 26(1) of the..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
18
Appendix 4
IT IS ORDERED THAT
 
7D-138
1.The full costs of the [defendant] herein, [including the costs of this application] are assessed at £ ..........
 
2.The amount of costs which it is reasonable for the [claimant] to pay to the [defendant] is [nil] [£ .......... which sum
is payable to the [defendant] on or before (date)].
 
3.The sum of £ .......... paid into court on account of the costs specified in paragraph 2 above and any interest accruing
thereon shall be paid out to the [defendant in part satisfaction] [claimant] as specified in the payment schedule to
this Order.
 
4.The amount of costs payable by the Legal Services Commission to the [defendant] [including the costs of this
application] is £ .......... which sum is payable to the [defendant] on or before (date)
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
