Regulation 4. - Payments in respect of claims or..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Regulation 4. - Payments in respect of claims or proceedings
other than as employment matter
White Book 2025  | Commentary last updated January 15, 2021
Volume 2
Section 7 - Legal Representatives—Costs and Litigation Funding
Section 7A - Litigation Funding after 1 April 2013
Damages-Based Agreements Regulations 2013
Regulation 4
4.— Payments in respect of claims or proceedings other than as employment matter
7A-30
(1) In respect of any claim or proceedings, other than an employment matter, to which these Regulations apply, a
damages-based agreement must not require an amount to be paid by the client other than—
(a) the payment, net of—
(i) any costs (including fixed costs under Part 45 of the Civil Procedure Rules 1998); and
(ii) where relevant, any sum in respect of disbursements incurred by the representative in respect of counsel’s
fees,
that have been paid or are payable by another party to the proceedings by agreement or order; and
(b) any expenses incurred by the representative, net of any amount which has been paid or is payable by another
party to the proceedings by agreement or order.
(2) In a claim for personal injuries—
(a) the only sums recovered by the client from which the payment shall be met are—
(i) general damages for pain, suffering and loss of amenity; and
(ii) damages for pecuniary loss other than future pecuniary loss, net of any sums recoverable by the
Compensation Recovery Unit of the Department for Work and Pensions; and
(b) subject to paragraph (4), a damages-based agreement must not provide for a payment above an amount
which, including VAT, is equal to 25% of the combined sums in paragraph (2)(a)(i) and (ii) which are ultimately
recovered by the client.
(3) Subject to paragraph (4), in any other claim or proceedings to which this regulation applies, a damages-based
agreement must not provide for a payment above an amount which, including VAT, is equal to 50% of the sums
ultimately recovered by the client.
(4) The amounts prescribed in paragraphs (2)(b) and (3) shall only apply to claims or proceedings at first instance.
Editorial note
7A-30. 1

Regulation 4. - Payments in respect of claims or..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Regulation 4 has the effect for personal injury claims of omitting any recoverable benefits recoverable by the CRU from the
sum recovered when calculating the percentage fee for the lawyer. The percentage recoverable is then limited to 25% of the
damages (pain suffering and loss of amenity, and damages for pecuniary loss other than future loss) recovered, net of any costs
payable (or paid) by other parties, and including any disbursements incurred by the representative in respect of counsel’s fees.
In non-personal injury, non-employment, matters in a DBA must not provide for a payment above an amount which, including
VAT, is equal to 50% of the sums ultimately recovered by the client.
The terms of a DBA required the client to pay the solicitors’ costs and expenses incurred up to the date of termination by the
client. The terms did not invalidate the agreement, as the regulations do not apply to termination provisions: Zuberi v Lexlaw
Ltd [2021] EWCA Civ 16.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
