Regulation 15. - Determination of costs, UKBC-WHITEBK 458578308 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Regulation 15. - Determination of costs
White Book 2025
Volume 2
Section 7 - Legal Representatives—Costs and Litigation Funding
Section 7D - Legal Aid
Regulations under the Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
Civil Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013
Part 3 Costs Orders Against a Legally Aided Party and the Lord Chancellor
15.— Determination of costs
7D-118+
(1) Where the court is considering whether to make a section 26(1) costs order, it must consider whether—
(a) but for cost protection, it would have made a costs order against the legally aided party; and
(b) if so, whether, on making the costs order, it would have specified the amount to be paid under that order.
(2) If the court considers that it would have made a costs order against the legally aided party, but that it would not
have specified the amount to be paid under it, the court must, when making the section 26(1) costs order—
(a) specify the amount (if any) that the legally aided party is to pay under that order if—
(i) it considers that it has sufficient information before it to decide what amount is, in that case, a reasonable
amount for the legally aided party to pay, in accordance with section 26(1) of the Act; and
(ii) it is satisfied that, if it were to determine the full costs at that time, they would exceed the amount
referred to in (i) above; or
(b) not otherwise specify the amount that the legally aided party is to pay under that order.
(3) If the court considers that it would have made a costs order against the legally aided party, and that it would have
specified the amount to be paid under it, the court must, when making the section 26(1) costs order—
(a) specify the amount (if any) that the legally aided party is to pay under that order if it considers that it has
sufficient information before it to decide what amount is, in that case, a reasonable amount for the legally aided
party to pay, in accordance with section 26(1) of the Act; or
(b) not otherwise specify the amount the legally aided party is to pay under that order.
(4) Any order made under paragraph (3) must state the amount of the full costs.
(5) Regulation 16 applies to the determination of—

Regulation 15. - Determination of costs, UKBC-WHITEBK 458578308 (2025)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
(a) the amount (if any) to be paid by the legally aided party where paragraph (2)(b) or paragraph (3)(b) applies;
and
(b) any application for a costs order against the Lord Chancellor.
(6) Where a determination under regulation 16 follows an order to which paragraph (2)(b) applies, the amount of the
full costs must also be assessed.
(7) Where the court makes a section 26(1) costs order that does not specify the amount which the legally aided party
is to pay under it, it may also make findings of fact (as to the parties’ conduct in connection with the dispute to which
the proceedings relate or otherwise) relevant to the determination of that amount, and those findings must be taken
into consideration in that determination.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
