Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 44) [Before 1 April 2013], UKBC-WHITEBK 459545365...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 44) [Before 1 April 2013]
White Book 2025
Volume 2
Section 7 - Legal Representatives—Costs and Litigation Funding
Section 7B - CPR 43 to 45 [Before 1 April 2013]
Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 44) [Before 1 April 2013]
 
Related Practice Directions
General Rules About Costs
Section 9 Costs Orders Relating to Funding Arrangements: Rule 44.3A
9.1
7BPD-3+
Under an order for payment of “costs” the costs payable will include an additional liability incurred under a funding
arrangement.
9.2—
 
(1)If before the conclusion of the proceedings the court carries out a summary assessment of the base costs it may
identify separately the amount allowed in respect of: solicitors’ charges; counsels’ fees; other disbursements; and any
value added tax (VAT). (Sections 13 and 14 of this Practice Direction deal with summary assessment.)
 
(2)If an order for the base costs of a previous application or hearing did not identify separately the amounts allowed for
solicitor’s charges, counsel’s fees and other disbursements, a court which later makes an assessment of an additional
liability may apportion the base costs previously ordered.
Section 10 Limits on Recovery Under Funding Arrangements: Rule 44.3B
10.1
7BPD-4+
In a case to which rule 44.3B(1)(c) or (d) applies the party in default may apply for relief from the sanction. He should do
so as quickly as possible after he becomes aware of the default. An application, supported by evidence, should be made
under Part 23 to a costs judge or district judge of the court which is dealing with the case. (Attention is drawn to rules 3.8
and 3.9 which deal with sanctions and relief from sanctions.)

Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 44) [Before 1 April 2013], UKBC-WHITEBK 459545365...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
10.2
Where the amount of any percentage increase recoverable by counsel may be affected by the outcome of the application,
the solicitor issuing the application must serve on counsel a copy of the application notice and notice of the hearing as soon
as practicable and in any event at least 2 days before the hearing. Counsel may make written submissions or may attend
and make oral submissions at the hearing. (Paragraph 1.4 contains definitions of the terms “counsel” and “solicitor”.)
Section 19 Providing Information About Funding Arrangements: Rule 44.15
19.1—
 
7BPD-5+
(1)A party who wishes to claim an additional liability in respect of a funding arrangement must give any other party
information about that claim if he is to recover the additional liability. There is no requirement to specify the amount of
the additional liability separately nor to state how it is calculated until it falls to be assessed. That principle is reflected
in rules 44.3A and 44.15, in the following paragraphs and in Sections 6, 13, 14 and 31 of this Practice Direction.
Section 6 deals with estimates of costs, Sections 13 and 14 deal with summary assessment and Section 31 deals with
detailed assessment.
 
(2)In the following paragraphs a party who has entered into a funding arrangement is treated as a person who intends
to recover a sum representing an additional liability by way of costs.
 
(3)Attention is drawn to paragraph 57.9 of this Practice Direction which sets out time limits for the provision of
information where a funding arrangement is entered into between March 31 and July 2, 2000 and proceedings relevant
to that arrangement are commenced before July 3, 2000.
Method of giving information
19.2—
 
(1)In this paragraph, claim form includes petition and application notice, and the notice of funding to be filed or served
is a notice containing the information set out in Form N251.
 
(a)A claimant who has entered into a funding arrangement before starting the proceedings to which it relates
must provide information to the court by filing the notice when he issues the claim form.
 
(b)He must provide information to every other party by serving the notice. If he serves the claim form himself
he must serve the notice with the claim form. If the court is to serve the claim form, the court will also serve the
notice if the claimant provides it with sufficient copies for service.
 
(3)A defendant who has entered into a funding arrangement before filing any document
 
(a)must provide information to the court by filing notice with his first document. A “first document” may be
an acknowledgement of service, a defence, or any other document, such as an application to set aside a default
judgment.
 
(b)must provide information to every party by serving notice. If he serves his first document himself he must
serve the notice with that document. If the court is to serve his first document the court will also serve the notice
if the defendant provides it with sufficient copies for service.
 
(4)In all other circumstances a party must file and serve notice within 7 days of entering into the funding arrangement
concerned.

Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 44) [Before 1 April 2013], UKBC-WHITEBK 459545365...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
(Practice Direction (Pre-Action Conduct) provides that a party must inform any other party as soon as possible about a
funding arrangement entered into prior to the start of proceedings.)
Notice of change of information
19.3—
 
(1)Rule 44.15 imposes a duty on a party to give notice of change if the information he has previously provided is
no longer accurate. To comply he must file and serve notice containing the information set out in Form N251. Rule
44.15(3) may impose other duties in relation to new estimates of costs.
 
(2)Further notification need not be provided where a party has already given notice:
 
(a)that he has entered into a conditional fee agreement with a legal representative and during the currency of that
agreement either of them enters into another such agreement with an additional legal representative; or
 
(b)of some insurance cover, unless that cover is cancelled or unless new cover is taken out with a different insurer.
 
(3)Part 6 applies to the service of notices.
 
(4)The notice must be signed by the party or by his legal representative.
Information which must be provided
19.4—
 
(1)Unless the court otherwise orders, a party who is required to supply information about a funding arrangement must
state whether he has—
 
entered into a conditional fee agreement which provides for a success fee within the meaning of section 58(2)
of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990;
 
taken out an insurance policy to which section 29 of the Access to Justice Act 1999 applies;
 
made an arrangement with a body which is prescribed for the purpose of section 30 of that Act;
or more than one of these.
 
(2)Where the funding arrangement is a conditional fee agreement, the party must state the date of the agreement and
identify the claim or claims to which it relates (including Part 20 claims if any).
 
(3)Where the funding arrangement is an insurance policy, the party must—
 
(a)state the name and address of the insurer, the policy number and the date of the policy and identify the claim
or claims to which it relates (including Part 20 claims if any);
 
(b)state the level of cover provided by the insurance; and
 
(c)state whether the insurance premiums are staged and, if so, the points at which an increased premium is
payable.
 
(4)Where the funding arrangement is by way of an arrangement with a relevant body the party must state the name
of the body and set out the date and terms of the undertaking it has given and must identify the claim or claims to
which it relates (including Part 20 claims if any).
 
(5)Where a party has entered into more than one funding arrangement in respect of a claim, for example a conditional
fee agreement and an insurance policy, a single notice containing the information set out in Form N251 may contain
the required information about both or all of them.

Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 44) [Before 1 April 2013], UKBC-WHITEBK 459545365...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
19.5
Where the court makes a Group Litigation Order, the court may give directions as to the extent to which individual parties
should provide information in accordance with rule 44.15. (Part 19 deals with Group Litigation Orders.)
Transitional Provision
19.6
The amendments to the parenthesis below paragraph 19.2 and to paragraph 19.4(3) do not apply where the funding
arrangement was entered into before 1st October 2009 and the parenthesis below paragraph 19.2 and paragraph 19.4(3)
in force immediately before that date will continue to apply to that funding arrangement as if those amendments had not
been made.
Section 20 Procedure Where Legal Representative Wishes to Recover From His Client
an Agreed Percentage Increase Which has Been Disallowed or Reduced on Assessment:
Rule 44.16
20.1—
 
7BPD-6+
(1)Attention is drawn to Regulation 3(2)(b) of the Conditional Fee Agreements Regulations 2000 and to Regulation
5(2)(b) of the Collective Conditional Fee Agreements Regulations 2000, which provide that some or all of a success
fee ceases to be payable in certain circumstances. [Both sets of regulations were revoked by the Conditional Fee
Agreements (Revocation) Regulations 2005 but continue to have effect in relation to conditional fee agreements and
collective conditional fee agreements entered into before 1st November 2005.]
 
(2)Rule 44.16 allows the court to adjourn a hearing at which the legal representative acting for the receiving party
applies for an order that a disallowed amount should continue to be payable under the agreement.
20.2
In the following paragraphs counsel means counsel who has acted in the case under a conditional fee agreement which
provides for a success fee. A reference to counsel includes a reference to any person who appeared as an advocate in the
case and who is not a partner or employee of the solicitor or firm which is conducting the claim or defence (as the case
may be) on behalf of the receiving party.
Procedure following Summary Assessment
20.3—
 
(1)If the court disallows any amount of a legal representative’s percentage increase, the court will, unless subparagraph
(2) applies, give directions to enable an application to be made by the legal representative for the disallowed amount
to be payable by his client, including, if appropriate, a direction that the application will be determined by a costs
judge or district judge of the court dealing with the case.
 
(2)The court that has made the summary assessment may then and there decide the issue whether the disallowed
amount should continue to be payable, if:

Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 44) [Before 1 April 2013], UKBC-WHITEBK 459545365...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
 
(a)the receiving party and all parties to the relevant agreement consent to the court doing so;
 
(b)the receiving party (or, if corporate, an officer) is present in court; and
 
(c)the court is satisfied that the issue can be fairly decided then and there.
Procedure following Detailed Assessment
20.4—
 
(1)Where detailed assessment proceedings have been commenced, and the paying party serves points of dispute (as to
which see Section 34 of this Practice Direction), which show that he is seeking a reduction in any percentage increase
charged by counsel on his fees, the solicitor acting for the receiving party must within 3 days of service deliver to
counsel a copy of the relevant points of dispute and the bill of costs or the relevant parts of the bill.
 
(2)Counsel must within 10 days thereafter inform the solicitor in writing whether or not he will accept the reduction
sought or some other reduction. Counsel may state any points he wishes to have made in a reply to the points of
dispute, and the solicitor must serve them on the paying party as or as part of a reply.
 
(3)Counsel who fails to inform the solicitor within the time limits set out above will be taken to accept the reduction
unless the court otherwise orders.
20.5
Where the paying party serves points of dispute seeking a reduction in any percentage increase charged by a legal
representative acting for the receiving party, and that legal representative intends, if necessary, to apply for an order that
any amount of the percentage disallowed as against the paying party shall continue to be payable by his client, the solicitor
acting for the receiving party must, within 14 days of service of the points of dispute, give to his client a clear written
explanation of the nature of the relevant point of dispute and the effect it will have if it is upheld in whole or in part by the
court, and of the client’s right to attend any subsequent hearings at court when the matter is raised.
20.6
Where the solicitor acting for a receiving party files a request for a detailed assessment hearing it must if appropriate, be
accompanied by a certificate signed by him stating:
 
(1)that the amount of the percentage increase in respect of counsel’s fees or solicitor’s charges is disputed;
 
(2)whether an application will be made for an order that any amount of that increase which is disallowed should
continue to be payable by his client;
 
(3)that he has given his client an explanation in accordance with paragraph 20.5; and,
 
(4)whether his client wishes to attend court when the amount of any relevant percentage increase may be decided.
20.7—
 
(1)The solicitor acting for the receiving party must within 7 days of receiving from the court notice of the date of the
assessment hearing, notify his client, and if appropriate, counsel in writing of the date, time and place of the hearing.
 
(2)Counsel may attend or be represented at the detailed assessment hearing and may make oral or written submissions.

Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 44) [Before 1 April 2013], UKBC-WHITEBK 459545365...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
20.8—
 
(1)At the detailed assessment hearing, the court will deal with the assessment of the costs payable by one party to
another, including the amount of the percentage increase, and give a certificate accordingly.
 
(2)The court may decide the issue whether the disallowed amount should continue to be payable under the relevant
conditional fee agreement without an adjournment if:
 
(a)the receiving party and all parties to the relevant agreement consent to the court deciding the issue without
an adjournment,
 
(b)the receiving party (or, if corporate, an officer or employee who has authority to consent on behalf of the
receiving party) is present in court, and
 
(c)the court is satisfied that the issue can be fairly decided without an adjournment.
 
(3)In any other case the court will give directions and fix a date for the hearing of the application.
Related Practice Directions
 
Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 43) [Before 1 April 2013]
 
Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 45) [Before 1 April 2013]
 
Costs Practice Direction (CPR Pt 47)
 
Back to top
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
