Section 65. - Security for costs and termination of retainer, UKBC-WHITEBK 458578218...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Section 65. - Security for costs and termination of retainer
White Book 2025  | Commentary last updated November 5, 2012
Volume 2
Section 7 - Legal Representatives—Costs and Litigation Funding
Section 7C - The Solicitors Act 1974
Solicitors Act 1974
Section 65
Part III Remuneration of Solicitors
Contentious business
65.— Security for costs and termination of retainer
7C-91
(1) A solicitor may take security from his client for his costs, to be ascertained by assessment or otherwise, in respect
of any contentious business to be done by him.
(2) If a solicitor who has been retained by a client to conduct contentious business requests the client to make a
payment of a sum of money, being a reasonable sum on account of the costs incurred or to be incurred in the conduct
of that business and the client refuses or fails within a reasonable time to make that payment, the refusal or failure
shall be deemed to be a good cause whereby the solicitor may, upon giving reasonable notice to the client, withdraw
from the retainer.
Note
7C-91. 0 Amended by the Legal Services Act 2007 Sch.16 para.61, with effect from 1 January 2010 (SI 2009/3250).
“Good reason” for terminating a retainer
7C-91. 1 The question arose whether a solicitor had “good reason” for terminating a retainer, where the client insisted on putting forward
a case and instructing counsel to argue it which was bound to fail. The Court of Appeal accepted that it may be difficult to draw
the line between an argument which can properly be articulated, and put forward, even with little prospect of success, and one
which cannot properly be articulated and which is believed to be bound to fail. In the particular case the client wished to put
forward grounds which counsel advised were “outside the scope which the law allows” and were “wrong in law”. Solicitors, as
officers of the court, would understand that they were under a professional duty not to include in the court documents that they
drafted any contention that they did not consider to be properly arguable; and not to instruct counsel to advance contentions
that they did not consider to be properly arguable. On the facts, it would be improper in a statutory planning appeal to advance

Section 65. - Security for costs and termination of retainer, UKBC-WHITEBK 458578218...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
an argument based on the merits of the decision by the inspector which was hopeless and not genuinely arguable. The solicitors
accordingly had “good reason” for terminating the retainer. The retainer was an entire contract that had not been completed,
but, since it had been terminated for good reason, the solicitors were entitled to their proper costs: Richard Buxton (Solicitors)
v Mills Owens [2010] EWCA Civ 122.
Section 65(2) of the Solicitors Act 1974 provides that in respect of contentious business, solicitors may request a client to pay a
reasonable sum on account, and failure to do so is good cause for the solicitors to withdraw from the retainer. Where solicitors
terminate an entire contract before completion for good reason, they are entitled to be paid for the work done (see Richard
Buxton v Mills-Owen) [2010] EWCA Civ 122; [2010] 1 W.L.R. 977). In deciding whether solicitors had wrongly terminated
their retainer, the Court of Appeal found that the vital question was whether the solicitors were entitled to and had suspended the
retainer, or whether they had wrongly terminated their engagement. Suspension and termination were different concepts, thus
where the solicitors had refused to carry out any further work without payment of bills (in excess of their earlier estimate) the
court found that the solicitors had not terminated their services but had suspended them pending provision of the fees. The client
informed the solicitors that he had lost confidence in them, and they took immediate steps to apply to come off the record. The
client’s termination of the retainer absolved the solicitors from any further performance of the contract, but did not absolve the
client from paying the costs properly incurred to that date: Cowdery Kaye Fireman & Taylor v Minkin [2012] EWCA Civ 546.
A building contractor instructed three firms of solicitors in succession to advise on and draft contract specific and bespoke
amendments to use with standard JSB forms on subcontracts. Having suffered losses as a result of the way in which the contracts
had been drawn, the Claimant alleged professional negligence against its latest solicitors on the basis that the firm was successor
in practice to the previous two firms. The previous two firms had been merged and subsequently incorporated into a limited
liability partnership with the later firm. The claimant argued that the relationship between it and the three firms in succession was
in fact a single contract retainer. The court held that this argument was unsustainable. A solicitor’s functions and responsibilities
had primarily to be determined by its retainer, and there was no suggestion or assertion that there was any express agreement
by which the single contract between the claimant and each of the three firms was concluded. The fact that the same people
within each of the firms had contact with and gave advice to the claimant did not give rise to there being some general retainer.
Shepherd Construction Ltd v Pinsent Masons LLP [2012] EWHC 43 (TCC), Akenhead J.
Where a client complained about the individual conduct of a solicitor at a firm, the firm, by agreement, continued to act at
a case management conference the following day. Following further complaints the solicitors wrote to the client stating that,
in view of the complaints, it was unsuitable for them to continue to act for her. A bill of costs was served, which the client
resisted. The client would not grant a charge over her property, and the solicitors accordingly exercised a lien over the papers.
The court held that there had been a breakdown of confidence between client and solicitor, the retainer had not been terminated
irregularly by the solicitors. Either the client had terminated the retainer by making the complaints, or the firm had terminated
it by giving reasonable notice following the loss of confidence by the client: French v Carter Lemon Camerons LLP [2011]
EWHC 3252 (QB), John Bowers QC. On appeal, the Court of Appeal concluded that the client had terminated the retainer:
[2012] EWCA Civ 1180.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
