4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation
Privilege” in Relation to Mediation
White Book 2025  | Commentary last updated December 12, 2024
Volume 2
Section 14 - Alternative Dispute Resolution
Alternative Dispute Resolution
4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation Privilege” in Relation to Mediation
14-18
It is very important, for reasons of public policy, that communications between parties to a mediation, and between those parties
and the mediator, remain private and confidential. The courts will, generally, be ready to reinforce the cloak of confidentiality
under which settlements are reached:
“... communications made with a view to an amicable settlement ought to be held very sacred; for if parties
were to be afterwards prejudiced by their efforts to compromise, it would be impossible to attempt an amicable
arrangement of differences” (per Lord Scott, quoting Romilly M.R. in Hoghton v Hoghton 51 E.R. 545, 321 when
discussing the “without prejudice” rule in Ofulue v Bossert [2009] UKHL 16; [2009] 2 W.L.R. 749).
In the context of ADR, Dyson LJ said in Halsey v Milton Keynes General NHS Trust [2004] EWCA Civ 576; [2004] 1 W.L.R.
3002 (at [14]):
“… parties are entitled in an ADR to adopt whatever position they wish and if, as a result the dispute is not settled,
that is not a matter for the court … if the integrity and confidentiality of the process is to be respected, the court
should not know, and therefore should not investigate, why the process did not result in agreement.”
In Woodward v Santander UK Plc (formerly Abbey National Plc) [2010] I.R.L.R. 834, Employment Appeal Tribunal, the
rationale for confidential, without prejudice discussions was put (at [61]) in this way:
“It is important that parties should be able to settle their differences (whether by negotiation or mediation) in
conditions where they can speak freely. A claimant must be free to concede a point for the purposes of settlement
without the fear that if negotiations are unsuccessful he or she will be accused for that reason of pursuing the point
dishonestly. A respondent must be free to adhere to and explain a position, or to refuse a particular settlement
proposal, without the fear that in subsequent litigation this will be taken as evidence of committing or repeating
an act of discrimination or victimisation. And it is idle to suppose that parties, when they participate in negotiation
or mediation, will always be calm and dispassionate. They should be able, within limits, to argue their case and
speak their mind.”
Finally, in Cumbria Waste Management Ltd v Baines Wilson (A Firm) [2008] EWHC 786 (QB), HHJ Kirkham said: “…
the court should support the mediation process by refusing, in normal circumstances, to order disclosure of documents and
communications within a mediation.” There are different ways in which mediation communications are protected and, as the
cases mentioned below demonstrate, it can be important to differentiate between the concepts of confidentiality, “without
prejudice”, legal professional privilege, and (if it exists) “mediation privilege”. The cloak of confidentiality is, in fact, multi-
layered. These cases will also demonstrate that, and again this is for reasons of public policy, confidentiality is not absolute
and there are exceptions whereby a court may wish to examine mediation matters that usually remain private and confidential.
Such exceptions are limited in nature and guarded by the court. Essentially, when considering whether matters in relation to
a particular mediation should remain confidential, the court will usually be involved in a careful public policy balancing act,
weighing the importance of encouraging parties to settle against, for example, some kind of impropriety.
Paragraph 14-24 mentions some less obvious aspects relating to confidentiality.

4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Issues that relate to confidentiality in its broadest sense are of importance in various ways; they are relevant, for example,
to lawyers advising a party before a mediation, to mediation providers when drafting agreements to mediate, to lawyers and
mediators in relation to the conduct of a mediation and to lawyers and the courts when there are applications, post mediation,
that the court should explore what took place at a mediation.
Correspondence Setting up ADR Meetings—Not Privileged
14-19
In Jones v Tracey [2023] EWHC 2256 (Ch), Master Marsh held that a letter simply proposing mediation does not attract
privilege, even if headed without prejudice. Also, the Civil Justice Council’s working group on pre-action protocols has
recommended that correspondence setting up mediations should not be privileged. (See CJC Review of Pre-Action Protocols–
Final Report Part I Annex 2 Draft General Pre-Action Protocol (Practice Direction) and Joint Stocktake Template (at para.4.17):
https://www.judiciary.uk/guidance-and-resources/civil-justice-council-publishes-final-report-on-pre-action-protocols.)
Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation Privilege” in Relation
to Mediation
14-20
In Farm Assist Ltd (in liquidation) v Secretary of State for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs [2009] EWHC 1102 (TCC);
[2009] B.L.R. 399; 125 Con. L.R. 154 (“Farm Assist 2”) the court gave guidance on these matters. It did so in the context of
an application by a mediator to set aside a witness summons that was intended to require her to give evidence about what had
taken place at a mediation. Having reviewed the authorities Ramsey J gave the following summary of the different concepts or
principles that are applied in the protection of the privacy of mediation:
“(1) Confidentiality:
The proceedings (at a mediation) are confidential both as between the parties and as between the parties and the
mediator. As a result even if the parties agree that matters can be referred to outside the mediation, the mediator can
enforce the confidentiality provision. The court will generally uphold that confidentiality but where it is necessary
in the interests of justice for evidence to be given of confidential matters, the Courts will order or permit that
evidence to be given or produced.
(2) Without Prejudice Privilege:
The proceedings are covered by without prejudice privilege. This is a privilege which exists as between the parties
and is not a privilege of the mediator. The parties can waive that privilege.
(3) Other Privileges:
If another privilege attaches to documents which are produced by a party and shown to a mediator, that party
retains that privilege and it is not waived by disclosure to the mediator or by waiver of the without prejudice
privilege.”
These three concepts of privilege will be explored in more detail below.
The mediator’s application in this case to set aside the witness summons was dismissed for a number of reasons: the parties had,
as they were entitled to do, waived the without prejudice privilege and, although the mediator was on the face of it entitled to
enforce the confidentiality provision in the Mediation Agreement, it was held that this was: “… a case where, as an exception, the

4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
interests of justice lie strongly in favour of evidence being given of what was said and done (at the mediation).” These findings,
however, had no practical consequences as the mediator did not have any relevant notes or any recall of the issues; further, the
case went on to settle in any event. Farm Assist 2 has attracted the attention of mediators and has resulted in the publication
by the Civil Mediation Council of two Guidance Notes “Mediation Confidentiality—Guidance Note 1” and “Chairman’s Note
on Farm Assist v DEFRA”.
In Wedgwood v Hosein [2024] EWHC 1836 (Ch) Master Marsh (sitting in retirement) provided a brief exposition on mediation
confidentiality. The context was an application for Beddoe relief, but the passages referred to below are of general application:
 
“17.Caution should be exercised before there is any encroachment upon the confidentiality of a mediation,
which will be governed by the mediation agreement. It may be permissible, depending upon the express or
implied terms of the agreement, to refer to offers made during the mediation; but even this cannot be taken
for granted. Offers made outside of mediation can be referred to in the context of a Beddoe application but
it does not necessarily follow that the court may be referred to offers that are made within the scope of the
mediation agreement.
 
18.The parties to a Beddoe application will need to consider the contractual obligations they have entered
into carefully before referring to any aspect of the mediation. Unless the agreement expressly permits a party
to reveal, to a greater or lesser degree, confidential information relating to the mediation, it will be wise for
consent to be sought from all parties to the agreement, including the mediator. The position is even more
sensitive concerning information shared or discussions in open or private sessions during the mediation. It is
doubtful whether it will ever be appropriate, even with full consent, to place such matters before the court.”
Confidentiality
14-21
As in Farm Assist 2, most agreements to mediate include clauses providing that, in addition to the mediation being conducted
on a without prejudice basis, the parties and the mediator are required to treat the proceedings as confidential. In Farm Assist
2 Ramsey J also found that the confidentiality would have been implied, even if the mediation agreement had not agreed it
expressly.
In concluding that the court can override such confidentiality, where it is necessary in the interests of justice, the court in Farm
Assist 2 took into account on the following passage in Toulson and Phipps on Confidentiality 2nd ed. (2006):
“Generally speaking, confidentiality is not a bar to disclosure of documents or information in the process of
litigation, but the court will only compel such disclosure if it considers it necessary for the fair disposal of the
case: see … British Steel Corporation v Granada Television Ltd [1981] A.C. 1096” (para.17-001).
If there is an explicit agreement on confidentiality it will, as with any other type of agreement, fall to be construed by the court.
In Farm Assist 2 the confidentiality provisions were narrowly drawn and not as wide as the mediator might have wished.
Another particular point clarified by this case was the finding that the mediator could enforce the provisions relating to
confidentiality, as against the parties. This means that where, as in Farm Assist 2, the parties have waived without prejudice
privilege the mediator may nevertheless be able to require that confidentiality will be maintained. (As in Farm Assist Ltd, the
Court may not always treat the mediator’s word on this issue as decisive: see the comment by Nicol J in Commodities Research
Unit International (Holdings) Ltd v King and Wood Mallesons LLP [2016] EWHC 63 (QB) at [21].)
Where there is a risk that a party may act in breach of the agreement that proceedings at a mediation be kept confidential they
may be restrained by an injunction (Venture Investment Placement Ltd v Hall [2005] EWHC 1227 (Ch); [2005] All E.R. (D)
224 and Instance v Denny Brothers Printing Ltd (Interim Injunction) [2000] F.S.R. 869.

4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
How far does the duty of confidentiality extend? In Aujla v Aujla [2022] 10 WLUK 191 the court examined the role of the
mediator, concluding that there was not a:
“… relationship between mediator and litigator that gave rise to a relationship of trust and confidence sufficient
to found an assertion of undue influence. A mediator has a duty of confidentiality, but otherwise his role is simply
to explore and facilitate the parties reaching their own settlement. He does not assume any fiduciary duties or
invite either party to the dispute to repose in him the type of trust and confidence necessary for a finding of undue
influence.”
Without prejudice
14-22
It is apparent, from the analysis in Farm Assist 2, that part of the mediation cloak of confidentiality is based on without prejudice
privilege, and that such privilege can be waived by the parties. For a straightforward application of the without prejudice rule
to mediation communications see Mason v Walton on Thames Charity [2010] EWHC 1688 (Ch). For a fuller statement of the
without prejudice rule or concept see Cutts v Head [1984] Ch. 290; [1984] 1 All E.R. 597, CA; Unilever Plc v The Proctor
& Gamble Co [2000] 1 W.L.R. 2436; [2001] 1 All E.R. 783; Muller v Linsley & Mortimer [1996] P.N.L.R. 74 and Vol.1,
para.31.3.40. There are, however, exceptions to this privilege (helpfully summarised by Robert Walker LJ in Unilever Plc v
Procter & Gamble Co [2000] 1 W.L.R. 2436) which are of importance in the context of mediation and ADR. A number of these
exceptions, which are largely based on public policy and the better administration of justice, appear in the following cases.
In Muller, the claimant’s initial claim had been against his fellow shareholders in a private company following his dismissal as a
director of that company. He settled that claim following without prejudice correspondence. Subsequently, he sued the solicitors
who had advised him in the initial claim, alleging negligence. It was held that the without prejudice correspondence in the initial
claim was disclosable in the subsequent claim. The public policy reasons that would have applied to prevent disclosure in the
initial claim did not apply in the context of the subsequent claim: any without prejudice statements or offers made in the initial
claim were kept from the court, in that claim, lest they be treated as an admission of liability. Once that claim has been concluded,
however, that reason fell away. (See Vol.1, para.35.12.3 and also Bradford & Bingley Plc v Rashid [2006] 1 W.L.R. 2066.)
The decision in Muller seems applicable in circumstances where there is a subsequent claim following an earlier claim and there
are relevant mediation communications in the earlier claim that do, on the face of it, appear to be subject to without prejudice
privilege. This was the finding in Cattley v Pollard [2007] EWHC B16 (Ch); [2007] EWHC 5561 (Ch). There the claimants
in the initial action were the executors of an estate who sued various defendants, including the solicitors acting in the estate,
for misappropriation of estate funds. A settlement was reached at a successful mediation involving some of the defendants. A
subsequent action was bought by the claimants against one of the defendants in the initial action who had not been involved
in the mediated settlement. The defendant in this subsequent action was concerned about the issue of double recovery by the
claimants and sought disclosure of mediation documents. The defendants resisted disclosure, arguing that mediations will not
succeed if confidentiality is broken. The court held, following Muller and taking account of the overriding objective to deal
justly with cases, that there should be disclosure limited to such parts of the mediation bundle as were factually material to the
defendant’s argument relating to double recovery.
See also Youlton v Charles Russell [2010] EWHC 1032 (Ch); [2010] Lloyd’s Rep. P.N. 227, Curtis v Pulbrook [2011] EWHC
167 (Ch) and Commodities Research Unit International (Holdings) Ltd v King and Wood Mallesons LLP [2016] EWHC 63
(QB). These are solicitor’s professional negligence claims where it was necessary for the court to enquire into the detail of
proceedings of a prior mediation to deal with the subsequent claim against the solicitors.
In Cumbria Waste Management Ltd v Baines Wilson (A Firm) [2008] EWHC 786 (QB); [2008] B.L.R. 330, however, the
court found that Muller did not apply and refused to order disclosure of confidential mediation documents for the purposes
of a subsequent action. The parties to the mediation did not waive privilege and the court held that the documents should
remain privileged, both on the basis that they were subject to without prejudice privilege and were confidential by virtue
of the agreement to mediate. HHJ Kirkham said that the court should support the mediation process by refusing, in normal
circumstances, to order disclosure of documents and communications within a mediation. The court found that the disclosure

4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
sought here did not fall within the exception to the without prejudice rule set out in Muller and, further, noted that the court in
Muller gave no consideration to the position of third parties.
In Pentagon Food Group Ltd v B Cadman Ltd [2024] EWHC 2513 (Comm) (9 August 2024), HHJ Tindal, sitting as a judge
of the High Court, found that evidence of the matters dealt with at a mediation were admissible in relation to a subsequent,
separate claim of misrepresentation which stemmed from the mediation. Two exceptions to without prejudice privilege applied.
(See para.14-23 below.) The court went on to find that when interpreting a settlement agreement, which was concise and drafted
quickly at the close of a mediation, the evidential context was perhaps more important than in a complex commercial contract
negotiated in detail over a lengthy period. The context could include matters which would otherwise be without prejudice.
Therefore, the circumstances in which the agreement was produced could be considered, even though that was in mediation
(paras 68–69).
Without prejudice—exceptions
14-23
Muller and the applicability of the without prejudice rule fell to be considered by the House of Lords in Ofulue v Bossert
[2009] UKHL 16; [2009] 2 W.L.R. 749. This property case concerned two sets of proceedings between the same parties and,
in particular, without prejudice negotiations between the parties during the first set of proceedings. The House of Lords said
that the without prejudice rule was based on both the public policy of encouraging the negotiated settlement of actions and the
express or implied agreement of the parties that communications in the course of such negotiations should not be admissible in
evidence. It was held that the rule did extend to without prejudice negotiations conducted during earlier proceedings involving an
issue which was still unresolved. The court further found that, although there were exceptions to the rule where justice required
it, as where it was necessary to prevent the rule being used to further impropriety, reasons of legal and practical certainty made
it inappropriate to create a further exception to limit the protection to identifiable admissions. Lord Hope referred to Ormrod
J’s words in Tomlin v Standard Telephones & Cables Ltd [1969] 1 W.L.R. 1378 when he said that the court should be very
slow to lift the without prejudice umbrella unless the case for doing so is absolutely plain. Lord Neuberger explained that if the
House of Lords created further exceptions to the without prejudice rule this would severely risk hampering the freedom parties
should feel when entering into settlement negotiations. In Briggs v Clay [2019] EWHC 102 (Ch) a similar line was taken, the
court providing a reminder that the without prejudice rule was broad in its effect, with narrow exceptions. The exceptions to
the without prejudice rule deriving from the decision in Muller were considered in the context of a prior mediation.
Another well-established exception to the without prejudice rule is that it does not prevent the admission in evidence of what
parties said to one another when the issue is whether or not such communications resulted in a concluded settlement agreement
(see Vol.1, para.31.3.40). At the trial of such issue, the fact that such communications took place between the parties at a
mediation does not confer on them a status distinct from any other without prejudice communications sufficient to take them
outside the scope of the exception or otherwise to render them inadmissible (Brown v Rice [2007] EWHC 625 (Ch); [2007]
B.P.I.R. 305; [2008] F.S.R. 3; Oceanbulk Shipping and Trading SA v TMT Asia Ltd [2010] UKSC 44 and Aujla v Aujla [2022]
10 WLUK 191, at [8].)
As seen in Farm Assist 2, parties can waive their entitlement to without prejudice confidentiality and did so in Chantry Vellacott
v Convergence Group [2007] EWHC 1774, Carleton (Earl of Malmesbury) v Strutt & Parker (A Partnership) [2008] EWHC
424 (QB) and Pedriks v Grimaux [2021] EWHC 3448 (QB) (at [13]). In Carleton, Jack J made adverse findings in relation to
a party’s recovery of costs on the basis of that party’s conduct during a mediation. He said that “the claimant’s position at the
mediation was plainly unrealistic and unreasonable” and found that, had they made an offer which truly reflected their position,
the mediation might have succeeded. Note, however, that without prejudice privilege is effectively regarded as a joint privilege
and cannot be waived by one party alone (see Somatra Ltd v Sinclair Roche & Temperley (No.1) [2000] 1 W.L.R. 2453; [2000]
2 Lloyd’s Rep. 673, referred to in Vol.1 at para.31.3.40).
In Smith Group v Weiss, 22 March 2002, unrep., the court followed Somatra (see above) when considering whether material,
prepared for a mediation that did not result in a settlement, should retain its without prejudice status. It was held that the material
should remain without prejudice save in clear and unequivocal circumstances.
The court had to consider whether in all the circumstances it was fair and just to allow a party to rely on the material.

4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
Where the court directs under r.35.12 that there should be a discussion between experts and that they must prepare a statement
for the court, any such statement is available for use in the proceedings and is not protected by the without prejudice privilege
(see Vol.1, para.35.12.3 below). Consequently, where a mediation takes place after such order, it cannot be argued in subsequent
proceedings before the court that the statement cannot be referred to, even though the direction was made by the court with an
eye to assisting a contemplated mediation (Aird v Prime Meridian Ltd [2006] EWCA Civ 1866; [2007] C.P. Rep. 18; [2007]
B.L.R. 105, CA). See also Krishna Holdco Ltd v Gowrie Holdings Ltd [2025] EWHC 341 (Ch).
In Farm Assist Ltd v Secretary of State [2008] EWHC 3079 (TCC); [2009] B.L.R. 80; [2009] P.N.L.R. 16 (the precursor to
Farm Assist 2) the issue concerned legal advice privilege rather than the without prejudice concept. Party 1 sought to set aside
the agreement resulting from a mediation on account of duress by party 2. Party 2 said that, as the allegations about duress went
to party 1’s state of mind, it should be able to see the (usually privileged) documents containing the legal advice to party 1. It
was held that disclosure be refused, there having been no waiver of legal advice privilege. In Aujla v Aujla [2022] 10 WLUK
191, however, the court did review the conduct of the mediation when dealing with an application to set aside an agreement
resulting from a mediation on account of duress.
See also Berkeley Square Holdings v Lancer Property Asset Management Ltd [2020] EWHC 1015 (Ch) and King v Stiefel [2021]
EWHC 1045 (Comm) for an example of where the court will review confidential mediation papers in subsequent proceedings.
An example of a case where the court refused to permit a party relying on matters that took place at a mediation is E (A Child)
(Mediation Privilege), Re [2020] EWHC 3379 (Fam).
In Pentagon Food Group Ltd v B Cadman Ltd [2024] EWHC 2513 (Comm), the court found (at [61]–[65]) that two exceptions
to without prejudice privilege applied. These were the Unilever exception (Unilever v Procter & Gamble [2000] 1 W.L.R.
2436—unambiguous impropriety) and the Oceanbulk exception (Oceanbulk Shipping & Trading SA v TMT Asia Ltd [2010] 3
W.L.R. 1424 (SC)—admissibility of evidence of facts within the parties' common knowledge conveyed during without prejudice
negotiations where relevant to interpreting contractual words).
As mentioned in para.14-15, correspondence setting up ADR meetings will probably treated as not privileged, even where it
is marked Without Prejudice.
Without prejudice—threats
14-24
In Ferster v Ferster [2016] EWCA Civ 717; [2016] C.P. Rep. 42 a without prejudice offer to sell shares for an increased amount,
on the basis that alleged wrongdoing could lead to the company taking committal proceedings against the offeree, was held to
amount to blackmail. The threat fell within the unambiguous impropriety exception to prejudice and the offeree was permitted
to rely on it in his unfair prejudice petition. In Holyoake v Candy [2016] EWHC 2119 (Ch) a text message threat made during
without prejudice negotiations ahead of a commercial trial had not amounted to unambiguous impropriety and was therefore
not admissible in evidence. The threat did not amount to an abuse of a privileged occasion; it was no more than the sort of
negotiating tactic that the parties to the hard-fought commercial litigation would have expected. See also Interactive Technology
Corporation Ltd v Ferster [2015] EWHC 3895 (Ch).
Without prejudice save as to costs
14-25
In Savings Advice Ltd v EDF Energy Customers Plc [2017] 1 WLUK 179, during costs proceedings subsequent to the main
action, Master Howarth allowed a party to refer to costs information provided during a mediation of the main action. This
was on the basis that the duty of confidence and without prejudice privilege existed to protect the disclosure of admissions
or concessions made in negotiations, not costs information in the form of purely factual statements which had been disclosed
“without prejudice save as to costs”. See also Willers v Joyce [2019] EWHC 937 (Ch).

4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
Mediation privilege
14-26
The question of “mediation privilege”, something wider than traditional without prejudice privilege, is discussed below.
This question fell to be considered in Pentagon Food Group Ltd v B Cadman Ltd [2024] EWHC 2513 (Comm). This case was
heard not long after Churchill and the amendments to the CPR in October 2024 (as mentioned in 14-1) and the court opined
that, even though these developments enhanced the importance of ADR, this did not justify an enhanced form of "mediation
privilege" beyond without prejudice privilege. The reasoning of HHJ Tindal, sitting as a judge of the High Court, was that, in
the context of mediation, the without prejudice privilege duties of confidentiality can be enhanced by the parties' agreement to
mediate, and their conduct, to impose duties of confidentiality over and above those flowing from without prejudice privilege.
Those enhanced duties, he said, could even be raised by the mediator if called upon to give evidence, even if the parties both
waived without prejudice privilege ([55]–[57] and [60]).
Historically, questions of mediation privilege arose in Farm Assist 2 when Ramsey J, having considered “other privileges” (see
(3) in para.14-12 above), noted that in H. Brown and A. Marriott ADR Principles and Practice, 2nd edn (London: Sweet &
Maxwell, 1999) the authors discuss the possible existence of and desirability for a distinct privilege attaching to the mediation
process:
“It remains to be resolved definitively by the English Courts (if not by the legislature) whether there is a privilege
attaching to the whole mediation process, including all communications passing within that process, whether the
mediation relates to family matters, civil or commercial disputes or any other kind of issue” (para.22-088).
He went on to canvass the “… the need for a further ‘privilege’ which arises other than the Mediator’s right to confidentiality in
relation to the mediation proceedings.” In Brown v Rice [2007] EWHC 625 (Ch); [2007] B.P.I.R. 305; [2008] F.S.R. the court
commented, although it did not have to make a finding on the point, that:
“It may be in the future that the existence of a distinct mediation privilege will require to be considered by either
the legislature or the courts …”
Mr Justice Briggs, as he then was, has written on “Mediation Privilege?” in an authoritative two-part review in the New Law
Journal (159 N.L.J. 506 and 159 N.L.J. 550). Having reviewed the various concepts of privilege in relation to mediation he
goes on to develop a potential common law solution. This is based on a distinction between the facts that:
“... a mediator will act as a conduit for the sharing of such information between the parties as is commonly shared
in without prejudice negotiations: (shared information)”
and
“... the important part of the mediator’s facilitative role (which) is to encourage the parties to share with him or
her information, views, hopes and fears about the dispute which the party communicating them does not wish the
other party to know, and which the mediator agrees to keep secret from the other party (mediator secrets).”
His thesis likens mediator secrets to legal professional privilege, on the basis that parties to disputes should be able to unburden
themselves with absolute frankness to a mediator in the same way as with their legal advisers, and to argue that public policy
may justify a new privilege strictly limited to mediator secrets. He adds that such a privilege would not be likely to interfere with
the application to shared information in mediation of the recognised exceptions to the without prejudice principle, as occurred
in both Brown and Cattley. Mr Justice Briggs supports the idea of a new privilege by referring to the ability of the common law
to recognise a new form of privilege, where, in a new context, the public interest so requires, pointing out that a distinct form of
non-status based privilege, in connection with matrimonial conciliation relating to children, has recently been recognised: see
Re D (Minors) (Conciliation: Disclosure of Information) [1993] Fam 231 at 238. He concludes:

4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
“There is in principle therefore good reason why the courts should now recognise that the undoubted public
interest in facilitating the process of mediation as a desirable and often preferable means of dispute resolution,
by comparison with the full panoply of a trial, justifies the identification of a narrow form of mediator secret
privilege of the type described above. There is no reason why a party to a mediation should not be encouraged
to be as frank with the mediator as with his or her legal adviser. The similarity with the underlying justification
for legal professional privilege is therefore very close.”
Mr Justice Briggs’ call for a development in this area was made all the more timely by virtue of the fact that the EU Mediation
Directive (Directive 2008/52/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2008 on certain aspects of mediation
in civil and commercial matters) carries the requirement that member states must ensure that, with reference to cross-border
mediation, mediators must not be compellable to give evidence in civil proceedings or arbitration regarding information arising
out of or in connection with a mediation, except where overriding considerations of public policy otherwise require, or where
disclosure of the content of the mediation settlement agreement is necessary in order to implement or enforce it. The Directive
is no longer, post-Brexit, operative in England and Wales.
Other aspects relating to confidentiality
14-27
There are other ways in which mediation confidentiality may be called into question including, for example, money laundering
(Proceeds of Crime Act 2002), breaches of professional conduct, insolvency proceedings in circumstances where the court
reserves the power to veto settlement agreements and, arguably, a mediation settlement involving a minor where court approval
is required. Other examples might possibly include applications of the UK General Data Protection Regulation and the Data
Protection Act 2018 and the Freedom of Information Act 2001. For a review of confidentiality in this area see “The practical
significance of confidentiality in mediation” by Andrew Agapiou and Bryan Clark C.J.Q. 2018, 74.
In Glencairn IP Holdings Ltd v Product Specialities Inc (t/a Final Touch) [2019] EWHC 1733 (IPEC) the claimant had two
similar intellectual property actions against separate defendants, and both of these instructed the same firm of solicitors. The
claimant sought an order restraining the firm from acting for the defendant in the second action. This was on the grounds that
the solicitors should not act in the second action because of what they had learned, in a mediation in the first action, of the
claimant’s negotiating position and the terms on which the claimant was prepared to settle. The court declined to grant the order.
Bolkiah v KPMG [1999] 2 A.C. 222 considered.
Mediation Costs—Recoverability
14-28
There are three important points regarding the recoverability of mediation costs (both the fees paid to the mediator and the costs
and disbursements in preparing for and attending mediation) that need to be considered before a mediation takes place. The
first concerns the provisions regarding costs in the mediation agreement (that is, the agreement which forms the contractual
basis under which the mediation takes place), the second relates to recoverability generally and the third is concerned with the
costs of mediations which take place pre-proceedings.
The costs provisions in a mediation agreement were considered in National Westminster Bank Plc v Thomas Feeney and Linda
Feeney [2006] EWHC 90066 (Costs) and [2007] (Costs Appeal). Eady J held that the successful party could not recover the
mediator’s costs or its costs for preparing for and attending at the mediation because: (a) the mediation agreement entered in to
by the parties on the mediation provider’s standard terms was on the basis that the mediator’s fee would be borne equally by
the parties who would bear their own costs; (b) the Tomlin Order agreed when settlement was reached did not deal explicitly
with the costs of the mediation; and (c) it was held that the Tomlin Order did not alter the mediation agreement. This approach
was followed in Lobster Group Ltd v Heidelberg Graphic Equipment Ltd [2008] EWHC 413 (TCC); [2008] 2 All E.R. 1173;
[2008] 1 B.C.L.C. 722.

4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
Subject to the provisions of the mediation agreement, mediation costs are, on the face of it, recoverable. In Feeney, Eady J
said that:
“... as a matter of general principle, costs incurred in a mediation would form part of the costs of the action just
as any reasonable costs of negotiation would (see Costs Practice Direction para.4.6(8)).”
Whether mediation costs are recoverable in pre proceedings mediations, however, appears to depend on both the provisions of
the mediation agreement (see above) and whether or not the mediation took place as part of the pre-action protocol work. This
is important, because, in accordance with the pre-action protocols, mediations are increasingly carried out pre-proceedings. The
cases dealing with this issue have involved the construction of s.51 of the Senior Courts Act 1981. In Lobster Coulson J was
considering mediation costs as one aspect of an application for security for costs and he put forward a number of reasons for
his view that the costs of the pre-action mediation were not recoverable:
“16. First, unlike the costs incurred in a pre-action protocol, I do not believe that the costs of a separate pre-action
mediation can ordinarily be described as ‘costs of and incidental to the proceedings’ (pursuant to s.51 of the Senior
Courts Act 1981). On the contrary, it seems to me clear that they are not. They are the costs incurred in pursuing
a valid method of alternative dispute resolution. Those costs were incurred in a form of dispute resolution which
had no connection to these proceedings, and which here took place 2.5 years before the proceedings even started.”
In McGlinn v Waltham Contractors Ltd [2005] EWHC 1419 (TCC); [2005] All E.R. 1126, Judge Peter Coulson QC had also
considered s.51 of the Senior Courts Act. He held that, although costs in respect of claims dropped by a claimant prior to
the commencement of proceedings were not, in unexceptional circumstances, capable of amounting to costs “incidental” to
the proceedings, the costs incurred in complying with a pre-action protocol may be recoverable as costs “incidental to” any
subsequent proceedings. Further, in Roundstone Nurseries Ltd v Stephenson Holdings Ltd [2009] EWHC 1431 (TCC); [2009]
5 Costs L.R. 787 the court, noting that a pre proceedings mediation was treated by the parties as an integral part of the pre-
action protocol work, applied McGlinn and held that, as a matter of principle, costs incurred during the pre-action protocol
process could be recovered as costs incidental to the litigation. The court did confirm that the costs of a separate, stand-alone
pre-proceedings mediation or ADR process would not usually form part of the costs of, or incidental to, litigation and would
not, therefore, be recoverable.
These decisions were discussed in North Oxford Golf Club v A2 Dominion Homes Ltd [2013] EWHC 852 (QB); [2013] 3 Costs
L.R. 509. See also Earl of Malmesbury v Strutt & Parker [2008] EWHC 424 (QB); 118 Con. L.R. 68; [2008] 5 Costs L.R. 736
and the comments on costs sanctions in relation to conduct at a mediation, above.
Multi-tier Dispute Resolution Clauses
14-29
Parties may enter into multi-tier dispute resolution clauses, which the courts are increasingly likely to uphold: see Ohpen
Operations UK Ltd v Invesco Fund Managers Ltd [2019] EWHC 2246 (TCC); [2020] 1 ALL E.R. (Comm) 786 and Children’s
Ark Partnerships Ltd v Kajima Construction Europe (UK) Ltd [2022] EWHC 1595 (TCC) at [39]–[83].
See, however, Kajima Construction Europe (UK) Ltd v Children’s Ark Partnership Ltd [2023] EWCA Civ 292 where the Court
of Appeal held that a judge had been correct to conclude that a dispute resolution procedure in a construction contract had been
unenforceable for uncertainty, and that even if it had been enforceable the proper exercise of discretion under CPR r.11(1)(b)
would have been to stay the claim rather than strike it out.
Miscellaneous Matters
14-30

4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
Where the parties freely consent to arbitration there is unlikely to be a denial of access to a court within the meaning of ECHR
art.6(1): Deweer v Belgium (1979–1980) 2 E.H.R.R. 439; Axelsson v Sweden No.11960/86, decision of 13 July 1990, unrep.,
EComHR, Pastore v Italy No.46483/Pastore v Italy No.46483/99, 25 May 1999, unrep., ECtHR, 2nd chamber. The key is the
absence of restraint: ibid. Where the court was excessively forceful in its encouragement of the use of ADR, ECHR art.6(1)
might be engaged. Any waiver of art.6 rights must be unequivocal: Zumtobel v Austria (1994) 17 E.H.R.R. 116, Gustafson v
Sweden (1998) 25 E.H.R.R. 623. The authorities concerning art.6 and ADR were reviewed by the Court of Appeal in Churchill
v Merthyr Tydfil CBC [2023] EWCA Civ 1416.
For the enforcement of a contractual ADR clause and comparison with an arbitration clause, see Cable & Wireless Plc v IBM
United Kingdom Ltd [2003] EWHC 316 (Comm); [2002] All E.R. (D) 277 (Colman J). In Kaur v Malhi [2022] EWHC 2219
(Ch), the court effectively upheld a mediation clause in refusing to grant injunctive relief where parties had not attempted
mediation in contravention of the clause.
Routinely, the courts will exercise their inherent jurisdiction to stay legal proceedings where there is an extant arbitration
clause, in effect enforcing the agreement to arbitrate the dispute. See, for example, Channel Tunnel Group Ltd v Balfour Beatty
Construction Ltd [1993] A.C. 334. Initially, it appeared that the English courts were tentative in edging towards the position that
they should exercise their jurisdiction to stay legal proceedings where there was an agreement between the parties to negotiate
or mediate (albeit an agreement that might be lacking in the certainty traditionally regarded as necessary for enforceability and
perhaps even non-binding) (ibid.; cf., Halifax Financial Services Ltd v Intuitive Systems Ltd [1999] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 303
(McKinnon J)). See further Vol.2, paras 9A-176 to 9A-177. See also Ardentia Ltd v British Telecommunications Plc [2008]
EWHC 2111 (Ch) where one of the parties commenced proceedings before a tiered dispute resolution procedure had been
exhausted. The procedure made an exception to the bar on commencing proceedings where, as was the case, interim relief
was sought from the court. The court, however, having granted interim relief, then stayed the matter to enable the other issues
between the parties to be dealt with under the procedure. See also Sulamerica CIA Nacional de Seguros SA v Enesa Engenharia
SA [2012] EWHC 42 (Comm); [2012] Lloyd’s Rep. I.R. 198: the agreement considered by the court was found to provide no
unequivocal commitment to engage in mediation. The parties had merely agreed in general, non binding, terms to attempt to
resolve differences by mediation. See also Wah v Grant Thornton International Ltd [2012] EWHC 3198 (Ch); [2013] 1 All
E.R. (Comm) 1226; [2013] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 11 and Mann v Mann [2014] EWHC 537 (Fam); [2014] 1 W.L.R. 2807; [2014] 2
F.L.R. 928.
In Emirates Trading Agency LLC v Prime Mineral Exports Private Ltd [2014] EWHC 2104 (Comm); [2015] 1 W.L.R. 1145;
[2014] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 457, Teare J held that a dispute resolution clause in a contract which required the parties to seek to
resolve a dispute by friendly discussions in good faith and within a limited period of time before the dispute could be referred
to arbitration was enforceable. Further, in R. (on the application of Med Chambers Ltd) v Medco Registration Solutions Ltd
[2017] EWHC 3258 (Admin) (Channel Tunnel Group Ltd v Balfour Beatty Construction Ltd [1993] A.C. 334 followed) the
court had to consider an escalation procedure which included a referral to mediation. Lavender J found that this should have
been followed, stating:
“ Prima facie, a Court should, in the absence of reasons to the contrary, refrain from exercising jurisdiction over
a dispute which a party has promised to refer to a particular dispute resolution procedure.”
In NWA v FSY [2021] EWHC 2666 (Comm), however, it was held that the failure of a party to comply with a term of an
arbitration agreement to seek to mediate a settlement of their dispute before referring it to arbitration did not result in the arbitral
tribunal not having jurisdiction to hear the dispute. The failure was a potential breach of a procedural requirement going to the
admissibility of the dispute for arbitration, and it was for the arbitrator to determine the consequence of any such breach.
In Lancashire Schools SPC Phase 2 Ltd (formerly Catalyst Education (Lancashire) Phase 2 Ltd) v Lendlease Construction
(Europe) Ltd (formerly Bovis Lend Lease Ltd) [2024] EWHC 37 (TCC) the court accepted jurisdiction over a claim issued
in breach of a mandatory adjudication clause in a private finance initiative project agreement. Although the clause made
adjudication a condition precedent to litigation, there were good reasons for not staying or striking out the claim. The dispute
was a multi-party one and was unlikely to be resolved by the bilateral adjudication mandated by the clause. Further, the claim
was likely to be consolidated with ongoing proceedings, and to delay the disposal of both claims pending adjudication would
be contrary to the CPR r.1.1 overriding objective.
See also Ohpen Operations UK Ltd v Invesco Fund Managers Ltd [2019] EWHC 2246 (TCC). Any agreement reached at
mediation needs to be recorded carefully and arrangements need to be made to implement the agreement in a manner that reflects

4. - ADR, Confidentiality, Without Prejudice and “Mediation..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
the outcome intended to be agreed between the parties. This involves consideration of all aspects relating to implementation
e.g. the impact of any taxation provisions that may arise during implementation e.g. the impact of s.2 of the Law of Property
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989. See Moore v Revenue and Customs Commissioners [2016] UKFTT 115 (TC) and Abberly
v Abberley [2019] EWHC 1564 (Ch). In ELM Property Finance Ltd v Johal [2018] EWHC 1000 (QB) a plea of non est factum
in relation to a settlement agreement reached at mediation was rejected. See also Pedriks v Grimaux [2021] EWHC 3448 (QB)
where the court considered alleged breaches of a mediation settlement agreement in a commercial dispute relating to fiduciary
relationships and estoppel by representation.
An interesting practice point arose in Savings Advice Ltd v EDF Energy Customers Plc [2017] 1 WLUK 179 , Master Howarth
stated:
“29. In my judgment it is imperative that when parties enter into a formal mediation or informal negotiations for
settlement of a claim that they do so in the full knowledge of their opponent’s costs. The amount of the costs of
litigation condition any subsequent negotiations or mediation that may follow.”
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
