Regulation 5. - Information required to be given before an..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Regulation 5. - Information required to be given before an
agreement is made in an employment matter
White Book 2025  | Commentary last updated February 16, 2015
Volume 2
Section 7 - Legal Representatives—Costs and Litigation Funding
Section 7A - Litigation Funding after 1 April 2013
Damages-Based Agreements Regulations 2013
Regulation 5
5.— Information required to be given before an agreement is made in an employment matter
7A-31
(1) In an employment matter, the requirements prescribed for the purposes of section 58AA(4)(d) of the Act are to
provide—
(a) information to the client in writing about the matters in paragraph (2); and
(b) such further explanation, advice or other information about any of those matters as the client may request.
(2) Those matters are—
(a) the circumstances in which the client may seek a review of costs and expenses of the representative and the
procedure for doing so;
(b) the dispute resolution service provided by the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) in
regard to actual and potential claims;
(c) whether other methods of pursuing the claim or financing the proceedings, including—
(i) advice under arrangements made for the purposes of Part 1 (legal aid) of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and
Punishment of Offenders Act 2012,
(ii) legal expenses insurance,
(iii) pro bono representation, or
(iv) trade union representation,
are available, and, if so, how they apply to the client and the claim or proceedings in question; and
(d) the point at which expenses become payable; and
(e) a reasonable estimate of the amount that is likely to be spent upon expenses, inclusive of VAT.
Note
7A-31. 1

Regulation 5. - Information required to be given before an..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Amended by the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (Consequential, Transitional and Saving
Provisions) (Amendment) Regulations 2013 (SI 2013/534) (as amended by SI 2013/621) to take account of the new
arrangements made for legal aid introduced by Pt 1 of the 2012 Act.
Editorial note
7A-31. 2 For employment claims, reg.5 stipulates the information which must be provided to the client, in writing, together with such
further explanation, information or advice as the client requests, before a DBA is entered into. Information must be given about
the point at which expenses become payable and a “reasonable” estimate of the likely expenses inclusive of VAT. (Note also
that reg.6 adds a further requirement, specific to employment cases, that amendments to agreements so as to add additional
causes of action must be in writing and signed by the client and the representative.) Information must also be given about the
various types of alternative dispute resolution options and alternative possible funding sources set out in reg.5.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
