Regulation 8. - Terms and conditions of termination in an..., UKBC-WHITEBK...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Regulation 8. - Terms and conditions of termination in an
employment matter
White Book 2025  | Commentary last updated February 21, 2013
Volume 2
Section 7 - Legal Representatives—Costs and Litigation Funding
Section 7A - Litigation Funding after 1 April 2013
Damages-Based Agreements Regulations 2013
Regulation 8
8.— Terms and conditions of termination in an employment matter
7A-34
(1) In an employment matter, the additional requirements prescribed for the purposes of section 58AA(4)(c) of the Act
are that the terms and conditions of a damages-based agreement must be in accordance with paragraphs (2), (3) and (4).
(2) If the agreement is terminated, the representatives may not charge the client more than the representative’s costs
and expenses for the work undertaken in respect of the client’s claim or proceedings.
(3) The client may not terminate the agreement—
(a) after settlement has been agreed; or
(b) within seven days before the start of the tribunal hearing.
(4) The representative may not terminate the agreement and charge costs unless the client has behaved or is behaving
unreasonably.
(5) Paragraphs (3) and (4) are without prejudice to any right of either party under general law of contract to terminate
the agreement.
Editorial note
7A-34. 1 Additional requirements for agreements in employment cases. The terms and conditions of an employment claim DBA must
(in addition to the other requirements) be in accordance with reg.8 namely that if the agreement is terminated, the fee charged
may not be more than the value of the work done. However the client may not terminate the agreement after settlement has
been reached or within seven days of a tribunal hearing date. The representative may not terminate the agreement and charge
costs unless the client is behaving or has behaved unreasonably (subject to the general law of contractual rights to terminate
agreements).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
