To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 27 - Surety
Surety’s Defences
Defence of discharge of principal debtor
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate document
1.
27-F8
The Defendant admits that XY Limited entered into the hire agreement with the Claimant set out in and annexed to the
Particulars of Claim (“the hire agreement”).
2.
The Defendant further admits that he entered into the written guarantee set out in and annexed to the Particulars of Claim
(“the guarantee”) whereby he agreed to guarantee the obligations of XY Limited under the hire agreement.
3.
It was a term of the hire agreement that, after eighteen months from the date of inception, XY Limited could terminate the
agreement by giving one month’s notice and paying two month’s rental to the Claimant.
4.
By a letter dated [date], XY Limited gave notice to terminate the hire agreement and paid the Claimant two months’ rent.
In the premises the obligations of XY Limited under the hire agreement were discharged and no further sum was due from
XY Limited to the Claimant.
Or
3.
On [date] an order was made in the High Court of Justice for the winding-up of XY Limited and on [date] PQ was appointed
liquidator of the company.
4.
By a letter dated [date] (copy annexed to this Defence), PQ disclaimed the hire agreement and thereby terminated it. From
that date the obligations of XY Limited under the hire agreement were discharged and no further sum was due from XY
Limited to the Claimant.

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
5.
The Defendant admits that by the letter dated [date] annexed to the Claim Form, the Claimant demanded payment by the
Defendant pursuant to the guarantee of the sum of £[..........] alleged to be due from XY Limited to the Claimant.
6.
By reason of the matters set out above, at the date of the letter no sum was due from XY Limited to the Claimant and the
Defendant is not liable to the Claimant under the guarantee.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
