To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Seller’s Defences
Denial of the implied condition of reasonable fitness and denial of the implied condition of satisfactory quality
(business sales)
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate document
1.
25-F42
The Defendant admits that it entered into the oral agreement with the Claimant whereby the Defendant agreed to sell and
deliver the goods referred to in the Particulars of Claim.
2.
The Defendant admits that the agreement was subject to the term that the goods should be of satisfactory quality implied
by the Sale of Goods Act 1979 (“the Act”), s.14(2).
3.
The Defendant denies that the said term extended to the matters alleged to be defects and said in the Particulars of Claim
to render the goods not of satisfactory quality.
Particulars
 
(a)On [date] prior to the agreement being made, the Defendant demonstrated the goods to the Claimant and drew his
attention to each of the said alleged defects and the Defendant will rely on the invoice relating to the sale in which
the alleged defects are set out (copy annexed to this Defence).
 
(b)On [date] prior to the agreement being made, the Claimant carried out a thorough examination of the goods (or the
Claimant engaged XY Limited to carry out a thorough examination of the goods) and each of the said alleged defects
were matters which such an examination ought to have revealed.
 
(c)The contract was a sale by sample and on [date] prior to the agreement being made, the Defendant sent the Claimant
a sample of the goods which were in all respects identical to the goods supplied under the agreement: in so far therefore
as the goods delivered contained the alleged defects, they complied with the sample delivered.
4.
In the premises the term of satisfactory quality is excluded for the alleged defects by s.14(2C) of the Act.
Or

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
2.
The Defendant admits that the agreement was subject to the Sale of Goods Act 1979 (“the Act”), s.14(3).
3.
The Defendant denies that it was a term of the agreement that the goods should be reasonably fit for the purpose alleged
in paragraph X of the Particulars of Claim.
Particulars
 
(a)The purpose alleged in paragraph X is not the purpose for which such goods are commonly used and the Claimant
did not communicate the purpose to the Defendant prior to the sale.
 
(b)The Claimant did not rely nor would it be reasonable for him to rely on the skill and judgment of the Defendant
in that the Claimant well knew that the Defendant was selling the goods in his capacity as a general dealer in surplus
stock and without expertise whereas the Claimant was an expert in goods of that description and carried out a full
examination of them.
4.
In the premises the Defendant is entitled to rely on s.14(3) of the Act as excluding a term that the goods were fit for the
purpose alleged.
5.
In any event the Defendant denies that the goods were not of satisfactory quality or were unfit for the alleged or any purpose.
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9]
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
