Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes
10-01
Bills of exchange, promissory notes and cheques are dealt with together in this chapter as all have features in common, derived
from the same common law and statutory sources. Bills of exchange are the central type of negotiable instrument, typically used
for trade finance. Promissory notes, used to make, or often to secure, payment are by statute equated with bills of exchange for
most purposes. Cheques are a species of bill of exchange, typically used as a means of simple payment.
It is not possible within a work of this nature to describe fully the substantive law of such instruments. For that purpose reference
should be made to one of the standard works, Byles on Bills of Exchange and Cheques or Chalmers & Guest on Bills of Exchange
and Cheques. 1  The summary below is necessarily incomplete, and is provided to assist in understanding the terminology and
context of the precedents which follow.
Sources
10-02
The law relating to bills of exchange, previously existing as a body of common law incorporating law merchant principles, was
codified in the Bills of Exchange Act 1882. In general, except where a lacuna, ambiguity or difficulty of construction arises in
the Act, or where a term in the Act had already acquired a technical meaning, it is unnecessary and inappropriate to go behind
its language. Section 97 of the Act expressly preserves the common law rules in so far as they are not inconsistent with its terms.
A substantial body of case law has nonetheless, and not surprisingly, arisen since.
The Act has remained largely unamended since 1882. Important statutory provisions relating to the collection and payment of
cheques and other instruments were enacted by the Cheques Act 1957. The Cheques Act 1992 inserted a new s.81A into the
1882 Act, rendering cheques drawn and crossed “account payee (only)” entirely non-transferable instruments, and provision
has recently been made for the electronic presentment of instruments such as cheques (see para.10-19).
Definition
10-03
A bill of exchange is defined by the Act (s.3(1)) as an “unconditional order in writing, addressed by one person to another,
signed by the person giving it, requiring the person to whom it is addressed to pay on demand or at a fixed or determinable
future time a sum certain in money to or to the order of a specified person or to bearer”.
Section 4 of the Act defines an inland bill as one which is or on its face purports to be both drawn and payable within the British
Islands (as defined there) or drawn within the British Islands upon a person resident there, and any other bill is a foreign bill.
The distinction is now for most purposes academic and no distinction is drawn in this text between them. In practical terms the
difference consists of the necessity for the process of noting and protest upon dishonour.
Bills of exchange are essentially instruments of trade finance. It is of their essence that the liabilities of parties to them are certain,
hence the detailed rules to be found in the Act. The obligations of the parties are embodied in the bill, and physical possession

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
of the bill is at the heart of their operation. They are intended to be freely traded and discounted, hence their independence of
the underlying transaction, the mechanism for easy and unambiguous transfer of them, and the characteristic of negotiability
which means that a party holding a bill as a “holder in due course” is entitled to insist upon payment of it irrespective of defects
in title or other equities, and in that respect to gain a better title than that of his predecessor.
Parties and liabilities
10-04
No party may be liable upon a bill who has not signed it (s.23). Capacity to contract on the bill is co-extensive with capacity
in the law of contract (s.22). A forged or unauthorised signature is wholly inoperative and can neither bind the person whose
signature it purports to be, nor transfer any rights in the bill (s.24). A signature may be in the form of a trade name, or in the
name of a firm in which case it is the signature of all of the partners. A signature by procuration operates as notice that the
agent has only limited authority, and the principal is bound only to the extent of the agent’s actual authority (s.25). Where a
person signs expressly as a representative he will not incur personal liability, but where there is no more than a description of his
status this will not by itself exempt him from liability, and the construction “most favourable to the validity of the instrument”
shall be adopted (s.26). 2
The person who makes, or “draws” the bill is known as the drawer. By s.55(1)(a) he engages that “on due presentment it shall
be accepted and paid according to its tenor, and that if it be dishonoured he will compensate the holder or any indorser who is
compelled to pay it, provided that the requisite proceedings on dishonour be duly taken”, though by s.16 the drawer of a bill or
an indorser may add an express stipulation (such as “sans recours” or “without recourse”) negativing or limiting his liability.
The person to whom the instruction to pay is addressed is known as the “drawee”. That person incurs no liability upon the bill
merely by being named in it. Many bills (known as acceptance bills) anticipate that they will be presented to the drawee for
his acceptance, which is the drawee’s signification of his “assent to the order of the drawer”. The maturity of bills which are
expressed to be payable (e.g. 60 days) “after sight” is fixed by the presentation for acceptance. A bill is accepted by the drawee
adding his signature to the bill, with or without additional words (s.17). An acceptance may be general, or may be qualified by
the addition of a condition, or limit upon the amount of the acceptance (s.19) provided it does not express that the drawer will
perform his obligation by any other means than the payment of money (s.17). The drawee who accepts the bill is then known
as the “acceptor” and he “engages that he will pay it according to the tenor of his acceptance” (s.54(1)).
10-05
A bill may be drawn payable to “bearer” in which case it is known as a bearer bill and is payable to the person in possession of it
(s.8(3)). A bill which is expressed to be payable to a particular person is payable to him or to his order (s.8(4)) and is known as
an “order bill”. Such a person is known as the payee, and must be named or indicated with sufficient certainty (s.7). A bill may
be drawn payable to more than one person jointly or in the alternative, or severally but if the payee is fictitious or non-existing
it may be treated as payable to bearer (s.7). It may be drawn payable to the drawer or to the drawee; when the drawer and the
drawee are the same person (as in the case of a bank draft drawn by a bank upon its own head office), or when the drawee is
fictitious or lacks the capacity to contract, the holder may, at his choice, treat the instrument as a bill or as a promissory note (s.5).
A bill may include words prohibiting transfer or indicating that it is not transferable, in which case it is valid between the parties
to it but not negotiable. Otherwise, a bearer bill may be transferred (negotiated) by delivery (s.31(2)). A bill payable to order
may be negotiated by indorsement of the payee and delivery of the bill (s.31(3)). For an indorsement to be effective under
English law it must comply with the requirements of s.32; but if a bill is negotiated while physically abroad the validity of
the indorsement (and the title of the person to whom it is transferred) will depend on the law of the place where those events
take place (s.72). An indorsement may be in blank, specifying no new payee, in which case the bill becomes payable to bearer
(s.34) or it may be specially indorsed, identifying the person to whom it is now to be paid, in which case it becomes payable
to that person or his order. The holder of a bill which has been indorsed in blank may convert the indorsement into a special
indorsement (s.34(4)). An indorsement may not be conditional (s.33), but it may impose restrictions upon transfer or amount to
a mere authority to deal with the bill, not a transfer of title to it (see s.35); restrictive indorsements are typically made when a
bill is to be presented through an agent, including a collecting bank, so as to confer upon the person presenting the bill authority
to receive the proceeds.

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Where an order bill is transferred for value without being indorsed the person to whom it is transferred acquires such rights as
the transferor, but takes the bill subject to any defects in title or equities. The transferee in such a case has the right to require
the transferor to indorse the bill to him (s.31(5)); where the transferor is unable or unwilling to do so the court may order that
the indorsement be made by an officer of the court (Senior Courts Act 1981 s.39).
10-06
A person who transfers a bearer bill without indorsing it is not liable upon the instrument. He warrants only to his immediate
transferor (provided he took it for value) that the bill is what it purports to be, that he has a right to transfer it, and that he is
not at that time aware of any fact that renders it valueless (s.58).
Otherwise the indorser of a bill “[e]ngages that on due presentment it shall be accepted and paid according to its tenor, and that
if it should be dishonoured he will compensate the holder or a subsequent indorser who is compelled to pay it, provided that
the requisite proceedings on dishonour be duly taken” (s.55(2)). Like the drawer, he is in a position analogous to a guarantor,
though he in turn is entitled to have recourse against the drawer or the acceptor, or any prior indorser.
In addition, the indorser of a bill is precluded from denying to a holder in due course the genuineness and regularity in all
respects of the drawer’s signature and all previous indorsements (s.55(2)(b)) or from denying to his immediate or a subsequent
indorsee that the bill was at the time of his indorsement a valid and subsisting bill, and that he had then a good title thereto
(s.55(2)(c)). The effect of these statutory estoppels is that an indorser, though he may have no title to the bill (for example
because the indorsement to him was a forgery), effectively creates a new bill upon which the chain of liabilities stops with him.
The holder of a bill is defined by s.2 of the Act as “the payee or indorsee of a bill or note who is in possession of it, or the bearer
thereof”. Such a person may or may not be a holder for value, or provided the necessary conditions are met, a holder in due
course. By s.38(1) the holder is the person entitled to sue upon a bill in his own name.
Delivery
10-07
No bill is complete until it is delivered, and every contract on a bill (the drawer’s, acceptor’s or any indorser’s) is revocable
and incomplete until the bill is delivered (except for an acceptance, which may be completed by notice being given to or in
accordance with the directions of the person entitled to the bill (s.21(1)). By s.21(2) there is a conclusive presumption in favour of
a holder in due course of valid and unconditional delivery by all parties prior to him. By s.21(3) there is a rebuttable presumption
in every case that where a bill is no longer in the possession of a party who has signed it there has been a valid and unconditional
delivery of it. It may be shown by evidence (other than against a holder in due course) that delivery was ineffectual because it
was done without authority, or was subject to a condition, or was for a special and limited purpose other than the transfer of
property in the bill (s.21(2)). As to the authority required for delivery to be effective, see Dextra Bank & Trust Co v Bank of
Jamaica 3  (concerning s.21(2)(a) of the Jamaican Bills of Exchange Act, which is in the same terms as the English statute).
Consideration
10-08
A bill must be supported by consideration, which may be any consideration sufficient to support a simple contract, or may be
an antecedent debt or liability (s.27(1)). Where a bill is taken in respect of an antecedent debt its effect is generally to suspend
(though not extinguish) the right to rely upon that debt, conditionally upon the bill being honoured. A person entitled to exercise
a lien over a bill is deemed to be a holder of it for value to the extent of his lien (s.27(3)), a situation which most often arises
during collection by a bank of an instrument for payment.
By s.27(2) “where value has at any time been given for a bill the holder is deemed to be a holder for value as regards the
acceptor and all parties to the bill who became parties prior to such time”. A bill may be negotiated without any value being
given, nonetheless a holder is entitled to enforce it provided value has at some point been given between him and the person

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
whose liability he seeks to enforce. By s.30(1) there is a rebuttable presumption that any person signing a bill has become a
party to it for value.
Promised or actual forbearance in respect of the liabilities of a trading company was held sufficient consideration to support
promissory notes given by an individual which “played the same functional role as guarantees”. 4
A person may sign a bill without receiving any consideration for so doing. Where this is done for the purpose of lending his
name to some other party to the bill he is known as an “accommodation party” (s.28(1)), and where it is the acceptor who
does so the bill is known as an “accommodation bill”. 5  An accommodation party is nonetheless liable to a holder for value
whether or not the holder knew at the time he took the bill that this was the case (s.28(2)). The importance of the distinction
arises between the parties arranging the accommodation; for example under an accommodation bill the drawer is as between
him and the acceptor primarily liable, and s.59(3) provides that where an accommodation bill is paid in due course by the party
accommodated, the bill is discharged. By s.56 any other person signing a bill (whether or not otherwise a party to it) thereby
incurs the liability of an indorser to a holder in due course.
By s.64 of the Act any material alteration to a bill (defined by s.64(2) to include any alteration to the date, sum payable, time of
payment, place of payment or the addition of a place of payment) discharges all the parties to it (unless they all assent) except
anyone responsible for or authorising the alteration or a subsequent indorser. A bill which has been materially altered, but where
the alteration is not apparent from an inspection of the face of it, is nonetheless enforceable as though it had not been altered
to the extent of its original terms if in the hands of a holder in due course.
Holder in due course
10-09
A holder in due course is defined by s.29(1) of the Act as:
“a holder who has taken a bill, complete and regular on the face of it, under the following conditions, namely—
 
(a)That he became the holder of it before it was overdue, and without notice that it had been previously
dishonoured, if such was the fact;
 
(b)That he took the bill in good faith and for value, and that at the time the bill was negotiated to him he had
no notice of any defect in the title of the person who negotiated it.”
The concept of a holder in due course is central to the concept of the Act and reflects the key feature of negotiability. If a bill in
circulation comes into the hands of a person in the circumstances described, that a person enjoys a special status under the Act
(s.38(2)); in essence he is entitled to enforce the bill according to its terms against all prior parties liable on it, free of any defects
in title of prior parties (such as those listed in s.29(2) which include fraud, duress, unlawful means, illegal consideration, or its
negotiation in breach of faith or in circumstances amounting to a fraud) or of any personal defences available to prior parties
among themselves. In addition, any holder (whether for value or not) who derives his title from a holder in due course and who
is not a party to any fraud or illegality has all the rights of that holder in due course against any prior parties (s.29(3)).
Presentment for acceptance
10-10
A bill may be accepted before it has been signed by the drawer, or is otherwise incomplete, when overdue, or having been
dishonoured (s.18).
A bill which is payable after sight must be presented so as to fix its maturity (s.39(1)), and the holder of such a bill must either
present it for acceptance or negotiate it within a reasonable time, or the drawer and any prior indorsers will be discharged (s.40).

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Any other bill must be presented for acceptance only if it is expressly stipulated, or it is payable elsewhere than at the residence
or place of business of the drawee though the delay in the latter case is excused if it is not practicable with reasonable diligence
to present it for acceptance before it falls due (s.39). Section 41 sets out the rules for valid presentment for acceptance, but those
are excused in the limited circumstances set out in s.41(2), in which case the bill may be treated as dishonoured.
If acceptance is refused, or the bill is not accepted within the customary time (s.42), or if the drawee offers only a conditional
acceptance which the holder is not prepared to accept (not being obliged to do so), or there are circumstances in which
presentment for acceptance is excused, the bill is dishonoured. If the holder accepts the qualified acceptance of the acceptor
this operates to vary the effect of the bill as drawn (s.19(2) 6 ), and unless the drawer and any prior indorser(s) have expressly
or impliedly authorised the qualified acceptance, or subsequently assent to it (which they are deemed to do if, having received
notice of it they do not within reasonable time dissent), they are discharged (except where the qualification is only a limitation
as to the amount). See generally, s.44.
When a bill is dishonoured by non-acceptance the holder acquires an immediate right of recourse against the drawer and prior
indorsers and there is no further requirement for presentment for payment (s.43).
Presentment for payment
10-11
The requirements for due presentment for payment are set out in s.45 of the Act, in particular a bill must be presented on its due
date or (if payable on demand) within a reasonable time. Such presentment (or delay in making otherwise proper presentment) is
excused in the circumstances set out in s.46. Otherwise the drawer and any indorsers are discharged from liability. If the bill is not
duly paid, or if it is overdue and there are circumstances such that presentment for payment is excused, it is dishonoured (s.47).
If a bill has been accepted generally there is no requirement to present for payment in order to render the acceptor liable (s.52(1)),
though a holder who commenced an action without so doing would be likely to be penalised in costs. Where presentment
is required under the terms of a qualified acceptance (for example specifying the place where the bill is to be presented) an
omission to present the bill on the day of its maturity will not discharge the bill unless this is expressly stipulated (s.52(2)).
The new Pt 4A of the Act provides at ss.89A–89F for the presentment of cheques and certain other bills and notes for payment
to be made by electronic imaging. 7
Notice of dishonour
10-12
The liability of the drawer or the indorser of a bill under s.55 is expressly dependent upon the requisite proceedings relating
to notice of dishonour having been taken.
Following dishonour by non-acceptance or non-payment, notice of dishonour must be given in accordance with the rules set
out in s.49, unless the requirement for such notice is dispensed with in the circumstances set out in s.50. Otherwise, by s.48, the
drawer and any indorser not receiving notice is discharged from liability. This section does not prejudice the rights of a holder
in due course taking the bill subsequent to the omission to give notice of dishonour (and to be such a holder he must have no
notice of these facts), nor does it require a bill for which notice of dishonour by non acceptance has been properly given to be
the subject of further notice upon dishonour (unless accepted in the meantime).
Section 51 contains provisions dealing with the noting or protest of a bill. Neither is necessary in respect of an inland bill unless
this is required for the purpose of suing one of the parties abroad. 8  An inland bill may be noted by the holder on dishonour
and may be protested where the acceptor becomes bankrupt or insolvent. Foreign bills must be protested in order to render the
drawer or indorser liable, though this is dispensed with in any circumstances in which notice of dishonour is itself dispensed
with, and delay in noting or protesting may similarly be excused by the circumstances (see s.51(9)).

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
No notice of dishonour, or protest, is required to hold the acceptor of a bill liable upon it (s.52(3)).
The drawer of a bill is in the position of surety for the acceptor. Likewise an indorser is a surety for all the previous parties. 9
In accordance with the general law of suretyship, if the holder enters into a binding agreement to give time to the acceptor,
etc., this will discharge the parties standing in the position of surety. 10  If an indorsee takes a new bill from the acceptor, this
will discharge a prior indorser. 11
Promissory Notes
10-13
Promissory notes are a species of negotiable instrument. They are in general taken to secure the payment of a debt. The obligation
to pay embodied in a promissory note is independent of the underlying transaction or relationship and may generally be enforced
free of set-offs of unliquidated cross claims. Moreover, a promissory note may be transferred by indorsement and delivery, and
provide the necessary conditions are met, a person who is a holder in due course will be able to enforce the note free of any
equities attaching to it. Their commercial purpose is therefore to ensure certainty of payment, and to facilitate the discounting
or transmission of a payment obligation. Correspondingly, it is for this reason that their use in connection with transactions
regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (subject to amendment by the Consumer Credit Act 2006) is subject to statutory
restriction.
So, in Cardinal Financial Investments v Central Bank of Yemen 12  it was held that a promissory note was enforceable between
the parties to it notwithstanding that state immunity issues would have arisen between the (disclosed) principals. A promissory
note may be enforced notwithstanding that the underlying debt for which it was taken would have become statute-barred, as
illustrated by Rogers v Von Goetz. 13  As to whether a document in the form of a promissory note entered into as part of a
settlement deed amounted to (unlawful) borrowing see Belize Bank Ltd v Association of Concerned Belizians. 14
Definition
10-14
Section 83(1) of the Act defines a promissory note as:
“an unconditional promise in writing made by one person to another signed by the maker, engaging to pay, on
demand or at a fixed or determinable future time, a sum certain in money to, or to the order of, a specified person
or to bearer.”
A document which merely records or acknowledges indebtedness, without containing explicitly or by clear implication a
promise to pay is not a note. 15  On the other hand, additional words, for example a condition as to the effect of giving time to
one of several makers, will not necessarily prevent an instrument being a promissory note. 16
In Banque Cantonale de Geneve v Sanomi 17  the defendant argued that because promissory notes were delivered as security,
and were to be redelivered on satisfaction of the underlying obligations, they were not negotiable, and for that reason not notes
within the Act. The argument was easily rejected by Blair J (at [28]): first, even if not negotiable, a promissory note is valid
between the original parties under s.8(1) of the Act. Secondly, whatever might have been agreed with the bank to whom they
were delivered, there was nothing on the face of the notes to restrict their negotiability or alter their legal status.
An instrument which does not conform to the statutory definition, for example by providing for payment “on or before” a
date, 18  is not a promissory note. Such an instrument will not be governed by the Act, and will not (unless otherwise acquired)
enjoy the characteristic of negotiability. It may nonetheless be perfectly enforceable between the parties to it as a simple

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
contract. Conversely, a great many contracts contain a provision which does comply strictly with the statutory definition, but
which are nonetheless not, and not intended to be, negotiable as promissory notes or otherwise (see Sibree v Tripp; Mortgage
Insurance Corp v IRC at 358, 19  per Bowen LJ: “[promissory notes] are meant to include documents the contents of which
consist substantially of a promise to pay a definite sum of money, and of nothing else” 20 ).
10-15
For the most part the Act equates promissory notes with bills of exchange, and the substantive law will be found in the same
sources. By s.89(1) subject to the provisions of Pt IV of the Act and to the remainder of that section, the remainder of the
Act applies with necessary modifications to promissory notes. For that purpose (by s.89(2)) the maker of a promissory note is
deemed to correspond to the acceptor of a bill, and the first indorser is deemed to correspond with the drawer of an accepted
bill payable to the drawer’s order. For a discussion of the relevant law see in particular Ch.24 of Byles on Bills of Exchange
and Cheques.
In Banque Cantonale de Geneve v Sanomi, 21  Blair J held that a defendant could not rely upon an alleged oral agreement not
to make any demand under the promissory notes. This was inadmissible as it contradicted the terms of the written instrument,
following the principle of New London Credit Syndicate Limited v Neale. 22  To allow such evidence would “completely
undermine the certainty and finality of negotiable instruments being used in the finance of oil trades.” The comments in
Kazeminy v Siddiqi, 23  in which the court accepted as arguable that it might be appropriate to revisit the long standing authorities
to that effect, did not assist the defendant.
By s.5(2) of the Act, where the drawer and the drawee of a bill are the same person (commonly, for example, the case where
a bank draft is drawn by a branch upon its head office 24 ), or where the drawee is fictitious or lacks capacity to contract, the
holder may treat the bill at his option as a bill of exchange or a promissory note. 25  Bank drafts issued in the form of a promise
to pay are (provided they comply in other respects) promissory notes within the Act.
A promissory note may be transferred by indorsement and delivery, and provided the necessary conditions are met, the law and
the liability of the parties to it are generally the same as apply to bills of exchange. A promissory note is inchoate until it is
delivered (s.84). Thereupon the maker engages that he will pay it according to its tenor, and is precluded from denying to a
holder in due course the existence of the payee or the payee’s capacity to indorse (s.88).
10-16
Presentment for payment is not necessary to render the maker liable unless a place for payment has been specified in the note
(s.87) in terms that “it must in effect form part of the contract for payment”. 26  Presentment for payment is necessary in order to
render an indorser liable, and such presentment must be made within a reasonable time of indorsement where a note is expressed
to be payable on demand (s.86).
As any other bill, a promissory note may (and often will) provide for payment of interest, or by instalments with or without a
provision for acceleration in the event of default, or payment at an agreed or ascertainable rate of exchange; such matters are
capable of amounting to a “sum certain” within the terms of s.9 of the Act. A promissory note may be made by more than one
person, who may be liable jointly, or jointly and severally; a note which provides simply “I promise to pay” and is signed by
two or more persons is deemed to be joint and several (s.85).
As between themselves the makers of a note may agree as to who is principally liable and who is, in effect, a surety signing
by way of accommodation only. The absence of a memorandum between them is no defence upon the note, 27  nor will one of
several joint maker’s status as an accommodation party affect his liability to the payee or other holder of the note. However, if
a holder, knowing then of the surety’s status, agrees to give time to the other (principal) debtor, the surety will be discharged. 28
Cheques
10-17
A cheque is defined as “a bill of exchange drawn on a banker payable on demand” (Bills of Exchange Act 1882 s.73), and
except where the provisions of Pt III of that Act provide otherwise, the remainder of that Act applies as appropriate (s.73). That

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
includes the definition of “Bill of Exchange” to be found at s.3 of the Act (see generally under Bills of Exchange) so that a
“cheque” which is drawn payable to “cash” or “wages” is not technically a cheque at all, since it is neither drawn in favour of
a named payee (or to his order), or payable to bearer. Such instruments are nonetheless valid instructions to the bank on whom
they are drawn to make payment, and (e.g.) the Cheques Act 1957 applies to them.
Despite the statutory context and their (potential) characteristics as negotiable instruments, generally cheques are now used
simply as instruments to effect payment between the drawer and the payee through the banking system. The Cheques Act 1992
introduced s.81A of the Bills of Exchange Act which provides (by s.81A(1)) that “where a cheque is crossed and bears across
its face the words ‘account payee’ or ‘a/c payee’, either with or without the word ‘only’, the cheque shall not be transferable, but
shall only be valid as between the parties thereto.” The vast majority of cheques drawn in the UK are drawn upon pre-printed
cheque books in this form. The effect is that the cheque is neither negotiable, nor even transferable.
Prior to that enactment the addition of the words “not negotiable” did not prevent transfer, but prevented the transferee or
indorsee of the cheque acquiring any better title than the transferor (see s.81 of the Bills of Exchange Act 1882). The addition
of the words “account payee” likewise did not affect the negotiability of the cheque, but operated as a direction to the collecting
bank; if a cheque so marked were collected without inquiry for the account of someone other than the named payee and turned
out to have been stolen or otherwise misappropriated, the collecting bank would have been negligent and so lost the benefit of
its protection under s.4 of the Cheques Act 1957. 29
The proceeds of a cheque which has been “crossed” (see ss.76–78) must be paid to a banker, and if a cheque is crossed specially
they must be paid to the banker so identified. A cheque which has been crossed can therefore only be collected through a bank.
If a banker pays a crossed cheque other than to a bank it will be exposed to liability in the event that payment was not made
to the true owner (see s.79). A detailed discussion of the mechanism of crossing cheques, and of the operations involved in
collection, is beyond the scope of this work. A bank which pays a crossed cheque other than in accordance with the crossing
acts in breach of mandate and will not be entitled to debit its customer’s account if payment was made to the wrong person. 30
Conversely, if a cheque is paid in accordance with its crossing in good faith and without negligence, both the paying banker
and the drawer are treated as though payment has been made to the true owner (s.80).
10-18
The issues which may arise in disputes concerning cheques tend to fall into three categories reflecting the different aspects of
the payment process:
 
(1)Disputes between the drawer of a cheque and his bank, upon whom the cheque was drawn. A bank is under a duty to its
customer to pay cheques drawn upon it by its customer in a proper form and in accordance with the mandate provided there
are sufficient funds standing to the credit of the account upon which it is drawn 31  or within the limit of an agreed overdraft
facility. 32  A bank may be liable in damages for breach of contract and in libel if it wrongly dishonours its customer’s
cheque. See generally Paget on Banking, 15th edn at para.22.113ff. 33  Conversely, a bank may be liable to its customer if it
pays without inquiry a cheque in circumstances where it ought to have appreciated that the cheque was drawn fraudulently
(see para.9-11).
 
(2)Claims brought by the person rightfully entitled to the proceeds of a cheque, against the bank who has paid them to or
collected them for another person not entitled (or against that other person). Where a bank collects (and sometimes pays)
a cheque for someone other than the true owner of it, it may be exposed to claims for conversion of the instrument itself,
or to recover the proceeds as money had and received.
 
(3)Disputes between the drawer and the payee of a cheque, and in the event of the cheque being negotiable, other parties
upon it. Their rights and obligations are essentially governed by the principles which apply generally to bills of exchange.
To be liable upon a cheque a party must sign it. The drawer of a cheque “engages that on due presentment it shall be …
paid according to its tenor” (s.55(1)). The cheque must be supported by consideration, though an antecedent debt will suffice
provided it is an obligation of the drawer. 34  Where a cheque (or any other negotiable security) is delivered in respect of an
underlying debt, it generally operates as conditional payment which is complete when payment is made. 35  Pending payment
the underlying obligation is suspended but not extinguished. 36  If a cheque is unpaid the payee may (and commonly will) sue
both upon the cheque and the underlying debt.

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
A cheque must be presented for payment in accordance with s.45 of the Act, unless there are circumstances among those in s.46
dispensing with the requirement (which would include the countermand of the cheque advised to the payee). Presentment for
payment was held to have been dispensed with in the circumstances of Fiorentino Comm Giuseppe Srl v Farnesi 37  (a claim
against the directors signing the cheques by virtue of s.349(4) of the Companies Act 1985, now repealed).
10-19
Presentment is usually effected through the agency of a collecting bank by the clearing system. The effect of s.45 is mitigated
by s.74 which provides that in the event of delay in presentment of a cheque for payment beyond a reasonable time the drawer
is only discharged to the extent of any actual loss which he suffers in consequence (which in practical terms would usually
require the intervening insolvency of the bank). It is nonetheless common for banks to return as “stale” cheques which have
been in circulation for a long time. In Commissioners of the Inland Revenue v Thomas Cook (NZ) Ltd 38  (a case concerning the
New Zealand Unclaimed Money Act 1971) the New Zealand Court of Appeal held that there was no requirement to present
stale cheques as the bank was no longer under an obligation to honour them (compare Byles on Bills of Exchange and Cheques
(30th edn) at paras 29–008 and 29–009). On appeal from that decision 39  the Privy Council doubted this conclusion, and the
proposition that a cause of action arose against the drawer from the point at which the cheque became stale, but did not analyse
the issue further, deciding the case on wholly different grounds.
In the UK cheques are now generally presented in electronic form, rather than by physical presentment, in accordance with
systems which have been adopted since 2017. Provision is made for this by Pt 4A of the Act, 40  and regulations made under it. 41
In common with other bills of exchange, in principle notice of dishonour must be given unless there are circumstances by which
it is dispensed with. In practice, the usual reasons for the return of cheques unpaid (that they have been countermanded, the
mandate has been determined, or there are insufficient funds) are grounds for dispensing with notice under s.50.
Conversion
10-20
A bank converts a cheque 42  if it collects it on behalf of a customer whose title to it is defective. This may arise, for example,
where an employee or agent draws a cheque on his principal’s account for an unauthorised purpose which is then collected
by the collecting bank for the agent’s account. In such a case, the cheque will remain the property of the principal, so that the
principal will have a claim against the collecting bank in conversion. 43
However, the collecting bank will not be liable if the agent had the apparent authority of the principal to make the payment. 44
Since the enactment of the Cheques Act 1992, all cheques crossed “account payee” (i.e. virtually all English cheques 45 ) are
non-transferable instruments. In practice, since the 1992 Act indorsement has been removed as a means of obtaining payment
on a stolen cheque. 46
The claim for conversion may be made by the person in possession of the cheque at the time of conversion, or the person who is
entitled to immediate possession. 47  If, for example, the cheque has not been issued (i.e. has never been delivered to the payee),
the cheque will usually be owned by the drawer. However, once the cheque has been delivered to the payee, the payee has the
immediate right to possession of the cheque and may make a claim for conversion. 48  Since possession is a common law notion,
a person with a purely equitable claim to a cheque will be unable to make a claim in conversion. 49
In general, damages are measured by the face value of the cheque. 50  However, where the cheque has been materially altered
(e.g. a fraudulent alteration of the name of the payee), it becomes void by virtue of s.64 of the Bills of Exchange Act 1882; in
such a case, the customer cannot recover the face value of the cheque since the bank converts nothing more than a worthless
piece of paper. 51
10-21

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
Section 4 of the Cheques Act 1957 does not require an assumption of negligence, just because the bank has the burden of
showing that it took reasonable care. The enquiry in each case will be fact sensitive, and current banking practice is highly
relevant to the issue of negligence; the courts should be wary of hindsight or of imposing on a bank the role of an amateur
detective. 52  The Claimant is entitled to “waive the tort” 53  of conversion and claim restitution of the value of the cheque. 54
Accordingly, it is conventional to include a claim for money had and received in the alternative to the claim for conversion.
As to the defences available to a claim in conversion, the bank has a statutory defence under s.4 of the Cheques Act 1957.
This section provides:
“Where a banker, in good faith and without negligence,
 
(a)receives payment of an instrument to which this section applies 55 ; or
 
(b)having credited a customer’s account with the amount of such an instrument, receives payment thereof
for himself;
and the customer has no title, or a defective title, to the instrument, the banker does not incur any liability to the
true owner of the instrument by reason only of having received payment thereof.”
Since the onus of proof lies on the bank, it should provide particulars of the absence of negligence. The question of whether
a collecting bank has been negligent or not has to be considered by reference to two stages: (a) the time when the account is
opened; and (b) the time when the cheque is handed over for collection up to the time of collection. It is no answer for a bank to
show that even if it had made inquiries which it negligently failed to make those inquiries would have had no causative effect
on the loss sustained (because, for example, the inquiries would merely have led to reassuring answers). 56
In addition, a defence to the claim will be available if and insofar as the proceeds of the cheque were applied in discharge of a
debt owed by the customer 57  (see para.9-10 on defences to a claim for breach of mandate).
The collecting bank may have a right of indemnity against its customer (based on an implied warranty of authority). 58  Similarly,
a right of indemnity may arise in favour of a bank which acts as agent for collection on behalf of another (typically, overseas)
bank. 59
While the new Pt 4A of the Act states (at s.89A) that the duties of paying and collecting bankers are to be unaffected electronic
presentment, there is a potential statutory liability under the Electronic Presentment of Instruments (Evidence of Payment and
Compensation for Loss) Regulations 2008 (SI 832/2018). 60
Footnotes
1
Byles on Bills of Exchange and Cheques, (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2019) (forthcoming) or Chalmers & Guest on
Bills of Exchange and Cheques, 18th edn (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2016).
2
For an illustration Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corp Ltd v GD Trade Co Ltd [1998] C.L.C. 238.
3
see Dextra Bank & Trust Co v Bank of Jamaica [2002] 1 All E.R. Comm 193.
4
Banque Cantonale de Geneve v Sanomi [2016] EWHC 3353 (Comm).
5
Scott v Lifford (1808) 1 Camp. 246; 9 East 347.
6
And see Meyer v Delacroix [1891] A.C. 520.
7
Part 4A was introduced by the Small Business, Enterprise and Employment Act 2015 (c. 26), ss.13(2), 164(4), see also
the Electronic Presentment of Instruments (Evidence of Payment and Compensation for Loss) Regulations 2018/832.
8
See Windle v Andrews (1819) 2 B.&A. 696; Bonar v Mitchell (1840) 5 Ex. 415.
9
See Scholefield Goodman and Sons Ltd v Zygnier [1986] A.C. 562 at 574.
10
Clarke v Wilson 150 E.R. 1118; (1838) 3 M.&W. 208.

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
11
English v Darley 126 E.R. 1156; (1800) 2 B.&P. 61.
12
Cardinal Financial Investments v Central Bank of Yemen [2001] Lloyd’s Rep. Bank. 1.
13
Rogers v Von Goetz unreported 29 July 1998 CA.
14
Belize Bank Ltd v Association of Concerned Belizians [2011] UKPC 35.
15
See, e.g. Akbar Khan v Attar Singh [1936] 2 All E.R. 545.
16
See Kirkwood v Carroll [1903] 1 K.B. 531.
17
Banque Cantonale de Geneve v Sanomi [2016] EWHC 3353 (Comm).
18
Williamson v Rider [1963] 1 Q.B. 89.
19
See Sibree v Tripp 153 E.R. 745; (1846) M. & W. 23 at 29; Mortgage Insurance Corp v IRC (1888) 21 Q.B. 352 at 358.
20
Akbar Khan v Attar Singh [1936] 2 All E.R. 545 at 550, and see Claydon v Bradley [1987] 1 W.L.R. 521 at 526, per
Dillon LJ.
21
Banque Cantonale de Geneve v Sanomi [2016] EWHC 3353 (Comm).
22
New London Credit Syndicate Ltd v Neale [1898] 2 Q.B. 487; also applied in Hitchings and Coulhurst Co v Northern
Leather Co of America [1914] 3 K.B. 907; Nicol’s Trustees v Sutherland [1951] SC (HL) 21 LDAB 184.
23
Kazeminy v Siddiqi [2009] EWHC 3207 (Comm).
24
See Abbey National Plc v JSF Finance & Currency Exchange Ltd [2006] EWCA Civ 328.
25
See also Novaknit Hellas v Kumar Bros International [1998] Lloyd’s Rep. Bank. 287.
26
Re British Trade Corp [1932] 2 Ch. 1 at 10.
27
McCall Bros Ltd v Hargreaves [1932] 2 K.B. 423.
28
See Oriental Financial Corp v Overend Gurney & Co (1871-72) L.R. 7 Ch. App. 142; Rouse v Bradford Banking Co
[1894] A.C. 586 at 591, unless the holder’s rights are expressly reserved: Bateson v Gosling (1871-72) L.R. 7 C.P. 9.
29
See House Property Company of London v London County and Westminster Bank (1915) 84 L.J.K.B. 1846 approved by
Scrutton LJ in Underwood (AL) Ltd v Bank of Liverpool and Martins [1924] 1 K.B. 775 at 793–794.
30
Bobbett v Pinkett (1876) 1 Ex. D. 368.
31
London Joint Stock Bank Ltd v Macmillan and Arthur [1918] A.C. 777 at 789.
32
Rouse v Bradford Banking Co [1894] A.C. 586 at 596, Bank of New South Wales v Laing [1954] A.C. 135.
33
Paget on Banking, 15th edn (London: LexisNexis, 2018).
34
See Lomax Leisure Ltd v Miller [2007] EWHC 2508 (Ch); [2008] 1 B.C.L.C. 262.
35
Re Charge Card Services Ltd [1988] 3 All E.R. 702 at 707.
36
See Cohen v Hale (1878) 3 Q.B.D. 371. See also Coltrane v Day [2003] EWCA Civ 342; [2003] 30 E.G. 146 and
Fusion Interactive Communications Solutions v Venture Investment Placement Ltd [2005] EWHC 736 (Ch); [2005] 2
B.C.L.C. 571.
37
Fiorentino Comm Giuseppe Srl v Farnesi [2005] EWHC 160 (Ch); [2005] 1 W.L.R. 3718.
38
Commissioners of the Inland Revenue v Thomas Cook (NZ) Ltd [2003] 2 N.Z.L.R 296.
39
Thomas Cook (New Zealand) Ltd v Commissioners of Inland Revenue [2004] UKPC 53; [2005] S.T.C. 297.
40
Introduced by the Small Business, Enterprise and Employment Act 2015 (c. 26), ss.13(2), 164(4).
41
Electronic Presentment of Instruments (Evidence of Payment and Compensation for Loss) Regulations 2018/832. For
discussion see Byles on Bills of Exchange and Cheques, 30th edn (2019) Ch.23.
42
It is not possible to convert money: Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977 s.14; however, a cheque, bill, note or other
instrument is capable of being converted.
43
Morison v London County & Westminster Bank Ltd [1914] 3 K.B. 356; Midland Bank v Reckitt [1933] A.C. 1; Lipkin
Gorman v Karpnale [1989] 1 W.L.R. 1340.
44
Marquess of Bute v Barclays [1955] 1 Q.B. 202; and see Lloyds Bank Ltd v The Chartered Bank of India, Australia
and China [1929] 1 K.B. 40 at 56.
45
As Rix J observed in Honourable Society of the Middle Temple v Lloyds Bank Plc [1999] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 193 at
208g–208h.
46
Encyclopaedia of Banking Law, (looseleaf) para.D(63.1).
47
The applicable principles are set out in Byles on Bills of Exchange and Cheques, 30 edn (2019) paras 22–013ff.
48
Yorkshire Bank Plc v Lloyd’s Bank Plc [1999] Lloyd’s Rep. Bank. 191; see also Surrey Asset Finance Ltd v National
Westminster Bank [2001] EWCA Civ 60.
49
MCC Proceeds Inc v Lehman Bros International (Europe) [1998] 4 All E.R. 675; Hounslow LBC v Jenkins [2004]
EWHC 315 (QB) at [12].

Chapter 10 - Bills of Exchange, Cheques and Promissory Notes, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
50
Morison v London County & Westminster Bank Ltd [1914] 3 K.B. 356 at 365; International Factors Ltd v Rodriguez
[1979] Q.B. 351 at 358. This is a “legal fiction”: OBG v Allan [2008] 1 A.C. 1 at [227]–[228], per Lord Nicholls; and
at [103] where Lord Hoffmann described the right to claim damages for conversion of a cheque as “an anomaly created
by the judges to solve a particular problem”.
51
Smith v Lloyds TSB Group Plc [2001] Q.B. 541.
52
Architects of Wine Ltd v Barclays Bank Plc [2007] EWCA Civ 239; [2007] 2 All E.R. (Comm) 285.
53
Although the actual election need not be made until trial.
54
United Australia v Barclays [1941] A.C. 1; see also Tang Man Sit (Deceased) v Capacious Investments Ltd [1996] 2
W.L.R. 192.
55
Cheques and other instruments as defined in s.4(2).
56
Marfani & Co Ltd v Midland Bank Ltd [1968] 1 W.L.R. 956, cited in Honourable Society of the Middle Temple v Lloyds
Bank Plc [1999] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 193 at 226d–226j; see also Thackwell v Barclays Bank Plc [1986] 1 All E.R. 676.
57
B Liggett (Liverpool) Ltd v Barclays Bank Ltd [1928] 1 K.B. 48; Re Cleadon Trust Ltd [1939] Ch. 286; Crantrave Ltd
(In Liquidation) v Lloyds Bank Plc [2000] Q.B. 917.
58
Sheffield Corp v Barclay [1905] A.C. 392; Yeung Kai Yung v Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corp [1981] A.C. 787;
but see Redmond v Allied Irish Bank Plc [1987] 2 F.T.L.R. 264; considered in Middle Temple v Lloyds Bank Plc [1999]
1 All E.R. (Comm) 193.
59
Middle Temple v Lloyds Bank Plc [1999] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 193; applied in Linklaters v HSBC Bank Plc [2003] 2
Lloyd’s Rep. 545.
60
See Byles on Bills of Exchange and Cheques, 30th edn (2019) para.23-032
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
