To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: events after the making of the contract
Defences relating to negotiable instruments under ss.123 and 124 of the CCA
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
20-F65
The Defendant admits accepting the bill of exchange referred to in the Particulars of Claim but makes no admissions as to
whether it was dishonoured either as alleged in the Particulars of Claim or at all.
2.
The said negotiable instrument was executed by the Defendant in discharge of a sum payable by the Defendant to the
Claimant under an agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) namely a consumer credit agreement
in writing made between the Claimant and the Defendant on [date] (copy annexed to this Defence).
3.
In the premises, by reason of s.123(1) of the CCA, the Claimant is precluded from enforcing the bill of exchange.
Or
1.
The Defendant admits drawing the cheque referred to in the Particulars of Claim but makes no admissions as to whether
it was dishonoured either as alleged or at all.
2.
The cheque was taken by the Claimant as security for the discharge by the Defendant of his obligations under an agreement
regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) namely a consumer credit agreement in writing made between
the Claimant and the Defendant on [date] (copy annexed to this Defence).
3.
By reason of s.123(3) of the CCA, the Claimant is precluded from maintaining any action upon the cheque or enforcing
it in any way.
Or

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
1.
The Defendant admits he entered into the agreement referred to in the Particulars of Claim. The agreement was an
agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”).
2.
The Defendant denies that there is due and owing to the Claimant any sum in respect of the said agreement.
3.
The Defendant drew a cheque on X Bank Plc dated [date] in the sum of £[..........] and delivered the said cheque to the
Claimant in discharge of the instalment of hire rent due on that date. In breach of s.123(2) of the CCA, the Claimant did
not negotiate the cheque to a banker but endorsed it to YZ Limited.
In all cases
4.
By reason of the Claimant’s said contraventions of s.123 of the CCA, the said agreement is unenforceable pursuant to
s.124(1) of the CCA. Accordingly, if, which is denied, any sum would be due from the Defendant to the Claimant, under
the agreement, the Claimant is precluded from recovering the same by s.124 of the CCA.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
