Claim for damages for negligence against auditors, UKBC-BULLENL 459373403 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for damages for negligence against auditors
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 2
Part Y - Professional Negligence
Chapter 85 - Professional Negligence
Claim for damages for negligence against auditors
1.
85-Y1
At all material times:
 
(a)the Claimant carried on business as a manufacturer of widgets;
 
(b)the Defendants were a firm of Chartered Accountants.
2.
By an agreement made between the Claimant and the Defendants contained or evidenced in an engagement letter dated
[date] [or as the case may be] the Defendants agreed to act as auditors to the Claimant in consideration of the payment
of their fees (“the Agreement”).
3.
It was an implied term of the Agreement that the Defendants would discharge their engagement as auditors of the Claimant
with reasonable skill and care, and in particular with that degree of skill, care and diligence to be expected of reasonably
competent and prudent auditors.
4.
Without prejudice to the generality of the term pleaded in paragraph 3 above, in pursuance of their obligation to act with
reasonable skill and care, and/or as incidents of that obligation and/or of their role as auditors and/or by way of further
implied terms of the Agreement, the Defendants owed the following specific duties to the Claimant:
 
(a)To report to the members of the Claimant on the accounts examined by them, and on every balance sheet and profit
and loss account laid before the members in general meeting.
 
(b)To state in their report:
 
(i)whether, in their opinion, the balance sheet and profit and loss account had been properly prepared in
accordance with the Companies Act 2006 (“the Act”); and
 
(ii)whether, in their opinion, a true and fair view was given, in the balance sheet, of the state of the Claimant’s
affairs, and in the profit and loss account, of the Claimant’s profit or loss for the financial year;
 
(c)To take reasonable care to satisfy themselves that the balance sheet gave a true and fair view of the state of the
Claimant’s affairs at the end of the financial year and that the profit and loss account gave a true and fair view of the
profit or loss of the Claimant for the financial year.

Claim for damages for negligence against auditors, UKBC-BULLENL 459373403 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(d)To take reasonable care to satisfy themselves that the balance sheet and profit and loss account had been prepared
in accordance with, and conformed to:
 
(i)the provisions of the Act; and
 
(ii)generally accepted accounting policies, principles and practice applicable in the United Kingdom, including,
in particular, the provisions of SSAPs and FRSs; the Claimant will refer to the relevant SSAPs and FRSs at trial
herein for their full terms, meaning and effect;
 
(e)In conducting the audit and in preparing the audit report, to act in accordance with the Act and the Auditing
Standards in force at the time; the Claimant will refer to the relevant Auditing Standards and Guidelines at trial herein
for their full terms, meaning and effect.
 
(f)In preparing the audit report, to carry out such investigations as would enable them to form an opinion as to whether,
inter alia, proper accounting records were kept by the Claimant and whether its balance sheet and profit and loss
account were in agreement with its accounting records.
 
(g)If they were of the view that proper accounting records had not been kept, or that the balance sheet and profit and
loss account were not in agreement with the accounting records, to state that fact in their report.
 
(h)If they could not obtain all the information and explanations which, to the best of their knowledge and belief were
necessary for the purposes of their audit, to state that fact in their report.
 
(i)To consider whether the information given in the Directors’ report for the financial year for which the accounts
were prepared was consistent with those accounts, and if not, to state that fact in their report.
5.
Further, or in the alternative, the Defendants owed to the Claimant duties of care in tort of like content and to like effect
as the duties and obligations set out in paragraphs 3 and 4 above (“the Duties of Care”).
6.
In purported pursuance of their obligations as auditors to the Claimant, the Defendants audited the Claimant’s accounts
for the year ended [date] (“the Accounts”).
7.
On or about [date], the Accounts were signed by [name] on behalf of the Directors of the Claimant, and the audit report
thereon was signed by the Defendants as auditors who stated as follows:
“We have audited the accounts at pages [..........] to [..........] in accordance with approved Auditing Standards.
In our opinion the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of the Company’s affairs at [date] and of
its profit and source and application of funds for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in
accordance with the Companies Act 2006.”
8.
In fact, the Accounts were materially misstated and in particular, the balance sheet did not give a true and fair view of the
state of affairs of the Claimant as at [date], and the profit and loss account did not give a true and fair view of the profit
or loss of the Claimant for the financial year ended [date].
Particulars of Misstatement
 
(a)No provision at all was made for any of the potential liabilities of the Claimant in relation to warranties given by
the Claimant to all purchasers of widgets.

Claim for damages for negligence against auditors, UKBC-BULLENL 459373403 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
(b)No provision was made for the following debts of the Claimant which should have been regarded as bad debts:
[specify].
 
(c)The following assets of the Claimant were overvalued: [specify].
 
(d)The Claimant’s net profit was overstated by [specify] as a result of the following expenses not being taken into
account: [specify].
9.
Had the Accounts not been misstated as set out in paragraph 8 above, the balance sheet and profit and loss account would
have appeared as set out in Schedule 1 hereto (“the Restated Accounts”). In particular:
 
(a)instead of there being net profits of £[..........] as shown in the Accounts, there would have been net losses of
£[..........]; and
 
(b)instead of there being net assets of £[..........] as shown in the Accounts, there would have been net liabilities of
£[..........].
10.
In planning and/or preparing and/or conducting the audit of the Accounts and/or in the making of the audit report thereon,
the Defendants acted in breach of the Agreement and/or in breach of the Duties of Care.
Particulars of Breach of Duty
 
(a)In relation to the Claimant’s warranty liabilities:
 
(i)the Defendants failed to obtain any or any sufficient relevant and reliable audit evidence to enable them to draw
reasonable conclusions therefrom as to the existence and/or true nature and/or extent of such warranty liabilities;
 
(ii)further or alternatively, the Defendants failed to take any or any adequate steps to understand the nature of the
business carried on by the Claimant and in particular, its method of operation and/or the type of customers it had
and/or the risks involved in that business and/or the industry in which it was involved.
 
(b)In relation to the Claimant’s bad debts, the Defendants failed to make any or any proper investigation into or
consideration or evaluation of the status and creditworthiness of the Claimant’s customers and of the likelihood and
extent of any bad debts on the part of such customers, and/or of the Claimant’s assessment or system of assessment
of the creditworthiness of its customers.
 
(c)In relation to the overvaluation of certain assets, the Defendants failed to obtain any or any sufficient relevant and
reliable audit evidence to enable them to draw reasonable conclusions therefrom as to the value of the assets concerned
and in particular they failed to obtain any or any proper valuation thereof.
 
(d)In relation to the expenses which were not taken into account, the Defendants failed to obtain any or any sufficient
relevant and reliable audit evidence; in particular they failed to make any or any proper investigation of the Claimant’s
records or any or any proper inquiries of the Claimant in order to ascertain whether there might not be such expenses.
 
(e)Generally, the Defendants failed to take reasonable care in preparing the audit and reporting on the Accounts; the
Claimant will say that had the Defendants acted prudently and competently they would not have stated that in their
opinion, the Accounts showed a true and fair view and/or otherwise approved the same as auditors.
11.
Accordingly, and by reason of the matters aforesaid, the Claimant has suffered loss and damage.
Particulars of Loss and Damage
 
(a)In reliance upon the Accounts, the Claimant paid:

Claim for damages for negligence against auditors, UKBC-BULLENL 459373403 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
 
(i)£[..........] by way of dividends to its shareholders; and
 
(ii)£[..........] by way of bonuses to the following directors: [specify].
 
(b)Had the Claimant been aware of its true financial position, as shown in the Restated Accounts, none of the payments
referred to in subparagraph (a) would have been made.
 
(c)Accordingly, the Claimant has lost the total sum of £[..........].
12.
Further, the Claimant claims interest upon all sums recovered pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 at such rate
and for such period as the Court shall deem appropriate.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Damages pursuant to paragraph 11 above.
 
(2)Interest thereon pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 at such rate and for such period as the Court shall
deem appropriate pursuant to paragraph 12 above, to be assessed.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
