Claim by bank against solicitor for breach of warranty of..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim by bank against solicitor for breach of warranty of
authority
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 2
Part Y - Professional Negligence
Chapter 85 - Professional Negligence
Claim by bank against solicitor for breach of warranty of authority
1.
85-Y7
The Defendants are and were at all material times a firm of solicitors practising from [address]. The Claimant is and was
at all material times a bank carrying on business, among other things, as a lender making loans secured on real property.
2.
By a mortgage application dated [date], and purportedly signed by A and Mrs A (“the Mortgagees”), the Mortgagees
applied for an advance of £[..........] to be secured against a property in their joint names situate at [address] (“the Property”).
The purpose of the loan was stated to be home improvements.
3.
B, a partner in the Defendants, was named in the said mortgage application as the Mortgagees’ solicitor.
4.
By a letter dated [date] the Claimant made the Mortgagees an offer of an advance of £[..........] to be secured by a mortgage
over the Property and on the same day the Claimant retained the Defendants to act for it in perfecting its security for the
said loan, in accordance with the terms of the said offer.
5.
There were implied terms of the aforesaid retainer that the Defendants would exercise reasonable skill and care in the
performance of their duties pursuant to the said retainer. Further or alternatively, the Defendants owed the Claimant a duty
of care in tort to the like effect.
6.
By a report on title dated [date] the Defendants confirmed that they had investigated title and that they considered the title
to be good and marketable and that the Property could safely be accepted as security for the loan.
7.
The Defendants thereby impliedly represented that they were authorised and instructed to act for both A and Mrs A in
relation to the said advance and mortgage (“the warranty of authority”).

Claim by bank against solicitor for breach of warranty of..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
8.
In reliance on the said warranty of authority and on the said report on title, the Claimant advanced the sum of £[..........]
secured by mortgage over the Property.
9.
In fact:
 
(a)Mrs A was at all material times living apart from her husband. She had in or about [date] telephoned C, a solicitor
employed by the Defendants, with a view to consulting the Defendants as to the possibility of divorce and had been
referred by the Defendants to another firm.
 
(b)A had forged Mrs A’s signature on the loan application and the mortgage deed and she had no knowledge of and
had not consented to the loan or the mortgage.
 
(c)A applied the sum advanced to clear his business overdraft with [name] Bank.
10.
The Defendants were aware or ought to have been aware, through C their agent, of the matters set out at paragraph
9(a) above. The Defendants nevertheless acted, in relation to the said loan and mortgage, on the instructions of A alone,
purporting to act on his own behalf and on behalf of Mrs A, and paid the sum advanced into an account in the name of
A alone.
11.
In breach of the said warranty of authority, the Defendants had no authority to act on behalf of Mrs A and she had not
instructed them to act on her behalf.
12.
Further or alternatively, the Defendants were in breach of the said implied term of the retainer and/or negligent:
Particulars of Negligence
 
(a)Failing, notwithstanding that the Defendants were or ought to have been aware of the matters set out at paragraph
9(a) above, to take any or any adequate steps to confirm that A was authorised to act on behalf of Mrs A or to verify
their instructions directly with Mrs A.
 
(b)Paying the sum advanced to an account in the name of A alone.
13.
By reason of the Defendants’ breach of the said warranty of authority and/or breach of the retainer and/or negligence, the
Claimant has suffered loss and damage.
Particulars of Loss and Damage
[Set out loss and damage.]
14.
Further, the Claimant is entitled to and claims interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 on any sum which
may be awarded herein for such period and at such rate as the Court shall think fit.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Damages.
 
(2)Interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 as aforesaid.

Claim by bank against solicitor for breach of warranty of..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
