Correspondence with sample or model, UKBC-BULLENL 459372222 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Correspondence with sample or model
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Action for breach of condition or warranty
Correspondence with sample or model
25-30
Where goods are sold by sample, SGA s.15 creates what are, in effect, two separate conditions:
 
(a)a condition that the bulk will correspond with the sample in quality (SGA s.15(2)(a));
 
(b)a condition that the goods will be free from any defect, rendering them unsatisfactory which would not be apparent on
reasonable examination of the sample (SGA s.15(2)(c)).
The second condition brings in the concept of satisfactory quality as defined by s.14(2A). As with correspondence with
description, this condition is not confined to sales made in the course of a business.
These provisions have been much expanded by the CRA for consumer sales. CRA s.13(2) provides:
“Every contract to which this section applies is to be treated as including a term that—
 
(a)the goods will match the sample except to the extent that any differences between the sample and the
goods are brought to the consumer’s attention before the contract is made, and
 
(b)the goods will be free from any defect that makes their quality unsatisfactory and that would not be
apparent on a reasonable examination of the sample.”
This is bolstered by two other provisions. CRA s.11(2) provides that where a supply is by sample as well as by description, it
is not sufficient that the bulk of the goods matches the sample if the goods do not also match the description. The second is
a new concept, supply by reference to a model. Under CRA s.14, if supply is by reference to a model, there is an obligatory
contractual term that the goods will match the model except to the extent that differences between the model and the goods are
brought to the consumer’s attention before he enters into the contract.
The terms imported by CRA ss.11, 13 and 14 cannot be excluded—CRA s.31.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
