To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: making of the contract
Defences arising out of the failure of the agreement of the lender or owner to disclose information
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
Version 2: to be used for agreements to which the Consumer Credit (Disclosure of Information) Regulations 2010
apply
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
The Defendant denies that the document referred to in the Particulars of Claim constitutes a valid agreement enforceable
by the Claimant.
2.
The document purports to be an agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and thus, if it were,
it would be governed by the Consumer Credit (Agreements) Regulations 2010 (“the Agreements Regulations”).
3.
The dealings between the Claimant and the Defendant before the making of the purported agreement were governed by
CCA s.55 and the Consumer Credit (Disclosure of Information) Regulations 2010 (“the Disclosure Regulations”). Further
or alternatively those dealings were regulated by CCA s.55A and/or s.55B and/or s.55C.
4.
In breach of the Disclosure Regulations, the Claimant failed to disclosure the information required by the Regulations
before entering into the agreement.
Particulars
 
(a)Contrary to Regs 3 and [8][10] of the Disclosure Regulations the Claimant failed to supply the Defendant with the
appropriate [Standard] European Consumer Credit Information form [(“SECCI”)] [(“ECCI”);
 
(b)Contrary to Regs 3 and [8][10] of the Disclosure Regulations the [SECCI] [ECCI] supplied by the Claimant did
not have all the relevant pre-contract credit information provided in the appropriate row [details] and the information
was not clear and easily legible.
 
(c)Contrary to Reg 3(4) of the Disclosure Regulations, the Claimant failed to give the following information

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(i)the total amount of credit to be provided under the agreement;
 
(ii)the rate of interest charged
 
(iii)the amount, number and frequency of payments
 
(iv)the existence of a right of withdrawal
 
(v)the Defendant’s right of early repayment
 
(vi)[or as may be under one or other of the 22 sub-paragraphs of Reg 3(4)]
5.
Consequently under s.55(2) of the CCA, the agreement itself was not properly executed and is unenforceable under s.65
of the CCA.
6.
In the circumstances the Defendant will say that
 
(a)he is entitled to rescind the agreement alternatively
 
(b)the agreement is enforceable only with the permission of the court.
[And in all cases]
7.
The Defendant will oppose any application for enforcement under s.127 of the Act.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
