Pre-Action Protocol for Professional Negligence, UKBC-BULLENL 459373397 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Pre-Action Protocol for Professional Negligence
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 2
Part Y - Professional Negligence
Chapter 85 - Professional Negligence
Pre-Action Protocol for Professional Negligence
85-11
The Pre-Action Protocol for Professional Negligence (“the Protocol”) applies to all claims against a professional (other than
construction professionals and healthcare providers) arising out of that professional’s negligence (or equivalent breach of
contract or breach of fiduciary duty). There are separate Protocols relating to Resolution of Clinical Disputes and Construction
and Engineering Disputes.
The aim of the Protocol is to establish a framework in which there is an early exchange of information so that the claim can
be fully investigated and, if possible, resolved without the need for litigation (see para.2.2 of the Protocol). The overarching
expectation is that the parties should act reasonably when seeking to comply with the Protocol (para.3.2) and the court will take
into account compliance or non-compliance with it when: (a) giving directions for the management of the case: CPR rr.3.1(4),
3.1(5) and 3.9(e); and (b) making orders for costs: CPR rr.44.3(5)(a).
The Protocol sets out four pre-action steps:
 
• The claimant should send the professional a Preliminary Notice (section 5) which should notify the professional of, and
set out brief details in relation to, the intended claim. The professional should acknowledge receipt within 21 days.
 
• The Preliminary Notice should be followed by a Letter of Claim (section 6) which should set out the detailed grounds of
the claim and the loss that it is said has been suffered. The Letter of Claim will normally be an open letter.
 
• The professional should send the claimant a Letter of Acknowledgment (section 7) acknowledging receipt of the Letter
of Claim within 21 days of receiving it.
 
• The professional has three months from the date of the Letter of Acknowledgment to investigate the claim, following
which a response should be sent to the claimant. That response may be by way of a Letter of Response (which should
set out a detailed response to the claim) and/or a Letter of Settlement (which should set out proposals for settlement)
(section 9). The Letter of Response will normally be an open letter, in contrast to the Letter of Settlement which will
usually be without prejudice. If the Letter of Response denies the claim in its entirety and there is no Letter of Settlement,
it is open to the claimant to commence proceedings. In any other circumstances, the professional and the claimant should
commence negotiations with the aim of concluding those negotiations within six months of the date of the Letter of
Acknowledgment. If the claim is not resolved within that period (and it is not extended by agreement), the claimant may
commence proceedings (see para.14.1).
It should be noted that the Protocol does not alter the statutory time limits for starting court proceedings.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
