To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Seller’s Defences
Denial of a breach of the conditions and warranties implied by the Sale of Goods Act 1979, s.12 or the Consumer
Rights Act 2015, s.17
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate document
1.
25-F39
The Defendant admits that it entered into the written contract with the Claimant annexed to the Claim Form whereby the
Defendant agreed to sell and deliver the goods referred to in the Particulars of Claim.
2.
The Defendant further admits that [the Sale of Goods Act 1979(‘the SGA’), s.12] [the Consumer Rights Act 2015 s.17]
applied to the contract.
3.
The Defendant denies that it was in breach of the terms of the agreement as alleged in the Particulars of Claim or at all.
4.
The Defendant admits that it did not have the right to sell the goods but denies that the Claimant has suffered the alleged
or any loss or damage in that it obtained good title to the goods by virtue of the sale.
Particulars
 
(a)the Defendant admits that it had previously sold the goods to XY Limited but had remained in possession of them
after such sale and title passed to the Claimant under SGA s.24;
 
(b)the Defendant had agreed to buy the goods from XY Limited and had obtained possession of them with the consent
of XY Limited: title therefore passed to the Claimant under SGA s.25(1);
 
(c)the Defendant was a mercantile agent in possession of the goods with the consent of the owner, XY Limited, and
sold them in the course of his business as such: title therefore passed to the Claimant on delivery under the Factors
Act 1889, s.8;
 
(d)the Defendant was the hirer of a vehicle under a hire-purchase agreement made with XY Limited (copy annexed
to this Defence) and the Claimant as a private purchaser without notice of the hire-purchase agreement obtained title
under the Hire-Purchase Act 1964, Part III.
Or

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4.
The Defendant denies that the contract contained a condition that it had the right to sell the goods. It was a term of the
contract that the Defendant was selling as the personal representative of PQ deceased and thus agreed to transfer only such
title as was possessed by the deceased.
Or
4.
The Defendant admits that the contract was subject to the implied warranty that the goods should be free from any
undisclosed charge or encumbrance but denies it is in breach of it.
Particulars
The Defendant admits the goods were subject to a fixed and floating charge by way of debenture over its assets granted to
X Bank Plc but avers that this charge was disclosed to the Claimant before the contract was made in a letter dated [date]
(copy annexed to this Defence).
Or
4.
The Defendant admits that the contract was subject to the implied condition that the Claimant should enjoy quiet possession
of the goods but denies it is in breach of it.
Particulars
The Defendant admits that the Claimant’s quiet possession of the goods has been disturbed by X Bank Plc but avers that
such disturbance was in proper and lawful exercise of rights under a fixed and floating charge by way of debenture over
its assets granted which charge was disclosed to the Claimant before the contract was made in a letter dated [date] (copy
annexed to this Defence).
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9]
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
