Undue influence exercised by husband over wife;..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Undue influence exercised by husband over wife; constructive
notice on part of bank (or other lender)
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 18 - Undue Influence
Undue influence exercised by husband over wife; constructive notice on part of bank (or other lender)
1.
18-E5
The Claimant is the wife of Mr A, the sole director and shareholder in a company, B Limited, the first Defendant. Mr
A and the first Defendant were both customers of C Bank Plc, the second Defendant, banking at the [..........] branch of
the second Defendant.
2.
On or about [date], the Claimant executed an unlimited guarantee (“the Banking and Financial Services Guarantee”) of
the liabilities of the first Defendant to the second Defendant. A copy of the Guarantee is attached to these Particulars of
Claim marked “A”.
Undue influence of first Defendant
3.
The Claimant entrusted the financial affairs of the family to her husband in whom she placed trust and confidence at all
times in relation to her financial affairs. Throughout their marriage of 28 years, Mr A has taken care of all financial matters
and has always discouraged the Claimant from taking any interest in the finances of the family.
4.
The execution of the Guarantee by the Claimant was procured by the exercise of undue influence by Mr A.
Particulars of Undue Influence
 
(i)On or about [date], Mr A returned to the matrimonial home bearing the unexecuted Guarantee.
 
(ii)Mr A told the Claimant that if she did not sign the Guarantee, the second Defendant, the first Defendant’s largest
creditor, would call in its debt.
 
(iii)Mr A also told the Claimant that he had personally guaranteed the debts of the first Defendant and would be
rendered bankrupt if that guarantee were called upon, and that the likely consequence would be that the matrimonial
home would be repossessed.

Undue influence exercised by husband over wife;..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(iv)Mr A said that if any of those things occurred, he would leave the Claimant and return to his native Peru taking
with him their three young children.
 
(v)As a result, the Claimant signed the Guarantee. At no time was she given the opportunity to take independent legal
advice nor was the nature and effect of the transaction explained to her.
Position of the Bank
5.
The relationship between the Claimant and the first Defendant was not commercial in nature. Further, the Claimant was
the wife of the sole director and shareholder of the principal debtor.
6.
The second Defendant failed to take any, or any adequate, steps to bring home to the Claimant the risk she was running by
standing as surety for the debts of the first Defendant and/or the nature and effect of the transaction.
7.
In particular, but without prejudice to the generality of the above, the second Defendant failed to satisfy itself that the
Claimant had received independent legal advice before executing the Guarantee.
8.
As a consequence of the facts and matters set out above, the second
Defendant had constructive notice of the exercise of undue influence by the first Defendant over the Claimant.
9.
By letter dated [date], the Claimant rescinded the Guarantee; alternatively, does so by service of these Particulars of Claim.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)A declaration that Guarantee has been rescinded/set aside as having been procured by the undue influence of Mr
A, and that the second Defendant had constructive notice of such undue influence.
 
(2)An order that the second Defendant do deliver up the Guarantee to be cancelled forthwith.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
