To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: events after the making of the contract
Defences arising out of the failure to give information during the currency of the contract
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
Defence
1.
20-F60
The Defendant admits that he entered into the agreement referred towith the Claimant set out in the Particulars of Claim.
The agreement was an agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”).
2.
The Defendant denies that he was in breach of the agreement as alleged in the Particulars of Claim or at all.
3.
Alternatively if, which is denied, the Defendant was in breach of the agreement, then at the time of the commencement of
these proceedings the Claimant was not entitled to enforce the agreement in that
 
(a)Contrary to CCA s.77(1) [78(1)], the Defendant having requested in writing a copy of the executed agreement
and having paid the requisite fee, the Claimant failed to supply him with a copy alternatively supplied him with a
document which was not a copy of the agreement sufficient to comply with that section and is precluded by CCA
s.77(4) from enforcing the agreement.
 
(b)Contrary to CCA s.77A the Claimant failed to give the Defendant the appropriate statement either within one year
of the agreement [the previous statement] or at all, alternatively supplied a purported statement which did not conform
to the section and to the Consumer Credit (Information Requirements and Duration of Licences) Regulations 2007 in
the following respects [details]. The Claimant was therefore in a period of non-compliance and under CCA s.77A(6)
 
(i)is precluded from enforcing the agreement;

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(ii)cannot recover any interest falling due within the period of noncompliance;
 
(iii)cannot recover any default sum payable during such period.
 
(c)Contrary to CCA s.77B the Claimant failed to supply the Defendant with a statement requested by the Defendant
on [date] alternatively supplied a purported statement which did not comply with CCA s.77B(3) to (5) in the following
respects [details] and is thus in breach of his statutory duty to the Defendant.
 
(d)Contrary to CCA s.78(4) and (4A) the Claimant failed to supply the Defendant with the statements of account
required by that section alternatively supplied statements which failed to comply with the section and with the
Consumer Credit (Information Requirements and Duration of Licences) Regulations 2007 in the following respects
[details] and is precluded by CCA s.78(6) from enforcing the agreement.
 
(e)Contrary to CCA s.[86B][86C][86E] the Claimant failed to give the Defendant [a notice of sums in arrears][notice
of default sums] either within the period specified by the CCA or at all alternatively supplied a purported statement
which did not conform to the section and to the Consumer Credit (Information Requirements and Duration of Licences)
Regulations 2007 in the following respects [details]. The Claimant was therefore in a period of non-compliance and
under s.86D of the Act
 
(i)is precluded from enforcing the agreement;
 
(ii)cannot recover any interest falling due within the period of non-compliance;
 
(iii)cannot recover any default sum payable during such period.
 
(f)Contrary to CCA s.[86B][86C][86E] the Claimant when giving the Defendant [a notice of sums in arrears][notice
of default sums] the Claimant failed to give the Defendant a copy of the current default information sheet pursuant to
s.86A of the CCA. The Claimant was therefore in a period of non-compliance and under s.86D of the CCA
 
(i)is precluded from enforcing the agreement;
 
(ii)cannot recover any interest falling due within the period of non-compliance;
 
(iii)cannot recover any default sum payable during such period.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
