To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: events after the making of the contract
Defence where the Defendant has given notice of withdrawal under CCA s.66A
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
20-F59
The Defendant admits he entered into the agreement referred to in the Particulars of Claim. The agreement was an
agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and was a subject to the right of withdrawal under
CCA s.66A.
2.
The relevant day for the purposes of the agreement was [date].
3.
Within 14 days of the relevant day on [date] the Defendant gave oral notice of withdrawal from the agreement to [name]
being the person designated in the agreement for the purpose of such notice.
Alternatively
3.
Within 14 days of the relevant day on [date] the Defendant gave written notice of withdrawal from the agreement by
[sending it by post to the postal address specified in the agreement] [sending it by facsimile to the number specified in
the agreement] [sending it electronically to the address specified in the agreement]. A copy of the notice is annexed to
this Defence.
4.
Following the giving of this notice, under CCA s.66A(7) the agreement is to be treated as if it had never been entered into.
5.
Consequently the Claimant is not entitled to maintain the said or any claim under the agreement.
[Statement of truth]

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Note
that PD16.6 now makes it clear that this procedure applies only to agreements not regulated by the Consumer Credit Act,
the pleadings for regulated agreements being prescribed by PD7B. In practice these forms will be restricted to the fairly
limited category of hire-purchase and conditional sale agreements involving an individual as hirer/buyer with fall outside CCA
regulation, such as business agreements over £25,000 and agreements with high net worth customers.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
