Chapter 23 - Lien, UKBC-BULLENL 459371933 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 23 - Lien
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 23 - Lien
23-01
At common law, a lien refers to the right of one person, rightfully and continuously in possession of property belonging to
another, to retain that property so long as an existing claim against the owner remains unsatisfied or to retain specific goods
in relation to which charges have been incurred until the charges have been paid. General liens are not favoured by the courts
because of the priority they afford as against other creditors and can exist only upon proof of a general usage or by express
agreement.
On the other hand, an equitable lien is not dependent upon possession and is in the nature of a charge, giving rise to a right of
sale albeit only by order of the court. As such, it falls within the definition of a mortgage for the purpose of s.205 of the Law
of Property Act 1925 and, in order to rank ahead of a purchaser, should be registered as a land charge.
A legal lien affords a defence to an action by the owner for possession of the goods. It does not itself confer a right of action. A
person exercising a lien has sufficient interest in retaining possession of the property that is the subject of the lien to maintain
a cause of action in conversion or trespass. Being dependent on possession, a legal lien is not required to be registered under
statutory rules relating to bills of sale or under the Companies Act 1985. Unlike an equitable lien, a lien at common law does
not confer a power of sale. In notable examples, however, statute has intervened to provide an express power of sale, such as
in ss.12 and 13 of the Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977 and ss.39, 41–42 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979.
The term “lien” may also be applied to a right held by a person who does not possess the relevant property but nevertheless
enjoys a right against the owner. For example, a solicitor, in addition to his legal lien over a client’s documents within his
possession, has a statutory right to ask the court to direct that property recovered is to stand as security for his costs. 1
Footnotes
1
Re Fuld (No.4) [1968] P. 727.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
