To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part K. - Defence of the Surety
Defence by supplier based on the Hire-purchase Act 1964, Part III
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
20-F70
The Defendant denies that he is liable to the Claimant either as alleged in the Particulars of Claim or at all.
2.
The Defendant admits that it entered into the sale agreement with the Claim¬ant whereby it sold to the Claimant the
car which is the subject matter of this action. It is further admitted that it was a condition of the sale agreement that the
Defendant was the owner of the car and should pass title thereto to the Claimant.
3.
It is denied that the Defendant was in breach of that condition either as al¬leged in the Particulars of Claim or at all.
4.
It is denied that XY Limited was the owner of the car at any material time and it is averred that at all material times the
Defendant was the owner thereof and lawfully passed title to the Claimant:
 
(a)by a hire-purchase agreement made [date] between XY Limited and PQ (copy annexed to this Defence), XY
Limited let the car on hire- purchase to PQ;
 
(b)by an oral agreement made [date] PQ sold the car to one GH for the sum of £[ ]: GH was a private purchaser and
purchased the car in good faith and without notice of the hire-purchase agreement;
 
(c)GH acquired a good title to the car pursuant to the Hire-Purchase Act 1964, Part III;
 
(d)by a written agreement dated [date] (copy annexed to this Defence) GH sold the car to the Defendant.
5.
In those circumstances, the Defendant acquired a good title to the car prior to the sale thereof to the Claimant.
[Statement of truth]

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
