To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
All agreements
Defence and Part 20 Counterclaim alleging misrepresentation and breach of condition in relation to an action brought
by the owner under a hire-purchase agreement
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
Defence
1.
20-F46
The Defendant admits that he entered into the hire-purchase agreement with the Claimant set out in and annexed to the
Claim Form.
2.
Prior to the Defendant entering into the agreement, it was orally represented to the Defendant by the Claimant [XY the
supplier as agent for the Claimant] that:
 
(a)[give details of relevant representations]
3.
The Defendant relied on those representations when entering into the agreement.
4.
Further by reason of the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973, s.10, there were implied terms of the agreement
that the goods:
 
(a)should be reasonably fit for the purpose for which the Defendant required them, namely [identify relevant purpose];

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(b)should be of satisfactory quality.
[Or, for agreements after 1 October 2015]
4.
Under the Consumer Rights Act 2015 s.9 it was an implied term of the agreement that the quality of the goods should
be satisfactory.
5.
The said representations were false:
 
(a)[give particulars of falsity]
6.
In breach of the said terms, the goods were not [reasonably fit for the purpose nor were they] of satisfactory quality:
 
(a)the Defendant will rely on the matters set out in paragraph 5;
7.
By reason of the said misrepresentations and breaches of the said terms, the Defendant was entitled to rescind the agreement
and to reject the goods. Alternatively he was entitled to treat the agreement as having been repudiated by the Claimant.
8.
By a letter dated [date] (copy annexed to this Defence), the Defendant exercised those rights and demanded that the
Claimant repossess the goods.
9.
In the premises, the Claimant is not entitled to the relief claimed or to any relief. If, which is denied, the Defendant is
liable to the Claimant, the Defendant will seek to set off against such liability such sums as he may be awarded by way
of counterclaim.
Part 20 Counterclaim
10.
By way of counterclaim, the Defendant repeats the defence herein.
11.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
In the premises, the Defendant is entitled to a declaration that he has lawfully rescinded the agreement and rejected the
goods or has accepted the Claimant’s repudiation of the agreement.
12.
If, contrary to the Defendant’s primary case, he was not entitled to rescind or otherwise terminate the agreement, by reason
of the said misrepresentations and breaches of the agreement, the Defendant has suffered loss and damage.
Particulars
 
(a)Cost of repairs to the goods £[..........]
 
(b)Difference in value between the cash price and the true value of the goods £[..........]
The Defendant therefore counterclaims:
 
(1)A declaration that he has lawfully rescinded the agreement and rejected the goods alternatively has lawfully
accepted the Claimant’s repudiation of the agreement.
 
(2)Alternatively to (1) rescission of the agreement.
 
(3)Damages for misrepresentation and breach of contract.
 
(4)Interest at the rate of x% pursuant to s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
