Statute Law—general, UKBC-BULLENL 459371222 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Statute Law—general
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 19 - Introduction
Statute Law—general
19-07
A feature of this section is that a great deal of the law is now statutory. Since the last edition, much of the law is also regulatory
and the interaction between the civil law that governs relations between the parties to a contract and regulatory law that governs
the conduct of traders towards their customers leads to problems for the litigator. Sale of Goods has been codified since 1893,
and up to the last edition was principally governed by the Sale of Goods Act 1979. As will be seen in Ch.25: Supply of Goods
and Digital Content, however, many of the provisions of that Act have been replaced by similar (though, sadly, not identical)
provisions of the Consumer Rights Act 2015 (the CRA) which is intended to codify supply of goods, digital content and services
and to replace (inter alia) much of the existing law relating to unfair contract terms. As the CRA (not unnaturally) applies only to
consumers, there are now two sources of law for sale of goods (the SGA and the CRA) depending on the status of the purchaser.
Similarly, though this has been the case for much longer, there are two sources of law for unfair contract terms, for consumers,
the CRA Pt 2 (which replaced EU-derived regulations dating back to 1993) and, for the rest, the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
Credit, Finance and Leasing was formerly dominated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 and its host of attendant regulations. As
will be seen in Ch.20: Credit, Finance and Leasing, however, the regulation of this industry has been transferred to the Financial
Conduct Authority (FCA) operating under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (FSMA). There is thus a dual system
of law, much of it regulatory. The difficulty here lies in the fact that regulatory rules—in this instance the FCA Handbook—are
unlike statutes and statutory instruments: they can be (and are) liable to modification virtually overnight and such modification
is not subject to either Parliamentary or ministerial scrutiny. Nevertheless, such rules have the force of law and, in appropriate
circumstances, can afford a consumer a right of action based on breaches of the rules.
Surety has had statutory requirements since the seventeenth century and commercial agency is now governed by regulations of
EU origin. Statutes impinge even on the section dealing with torts relating to goods with the Torts (Interference with Goods)
Act 1977 and the various exceptions to the rule nemo dat qui non habet contained in the Sale of Goods Act, the Factors Act
1889 and Pt III of the Hire-Purchase Act 1964.
It is, therefore, always necessary when framing pleadings in these areas to have recourse to the legislation itself. This will
normally make clear what are the elements of the cause of action or defence and may well provide material for a claim or a
defence which would not necessarily be available in an ordinary contractual case. A good example of the latter is afforded by
the Consumer Credit Act 1974 which provides a plethora of technical defences available to debtors and hirers.
In the introduction to each topic, the editors attempt a brief summary of the law and the principal statutory provisions but they
emphasise that this cannot be a substitute for a reference to the source material.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
