Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content, UKBC-BULLENL 459372274 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
The Sale of Goods Act 1979 and the Consumer Rights Act 2015
25-01
Since the inception of this august work in 1860, sale of goods has been seen as an obvious discrete topic, particularly since
the law in this area was brilliantly and definitively codified in 1893. There have been two major changes in legal conceptual
thinking since then. The first is purely technological. The last third of the century has seen electronic technology become a
dominant force in all our lives. The rapid and irresistible rise of computers and their software caught the law somewhat napping.
Supply of software was not really a supply of services as this was traditionally regarded, but it seemed hard to view a series of
electronic impulses as physical ‘goods’. This was especially important in instances where customer had bought software that did
not work. If software fell between the two stools of sale of goods and supply of services, then the legislation importing terms as
to fitness, quality and professional skill would not apply. In the end, the courts simply held that, by analogy with sale of goods, a
contract for the supply of software would necessarily contain implied terms as to fitness and quality, subject to the limited rights
of the supplier to exclude those terms under the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977. 1  By 2015, even in non-consumer cases, it
was generally accepted that a contract for the supply of software would be treated in much the same way as a contract for the
supply of goods. As will be seen, major changes were made in the law relating to consumers by the Consumer Rights Act 2015
(CRA) and the opportunity was taken to legislate expressly for the supply of what the CRA refers to as ‘digital content’.
The second major change in conceptual thinking came with the realisation that, when it came to such aspects as title to goods,
fitness for purpose, quality, conformity with description and so forth, there was no longer any defensible difference between
the modes of supply, whether they be outright sale, hire-purchase, conditional sale or simple hire. Consequently, when drafting
the CRA it seemed logical to lump all forms of supply into one basket and apply (mutandis mutatis of course) the same rules
to the lot. Again, the supply of digital content was to be subject to the same rules no matter what the legal niceties of the mode
of supply. Patently, different (though similar) criteria were going to apply to the supply of services so that the CRA treated the
rules for services contracts separately.
Accordingly, it seems appropriate to update this section by expanding it to cover the supply of goods and the supply of digital
content. Contracts for services will continue to be dealt with in other sections of the work, dependent on the nature of the
services provided.
That said, it is not proposed to duplicate the contents of Chapter 20: Credit, Finance and Leasing. Actions arising out of hire-
purchase, conditional sale, credit sale and simple hire will be dealt with in that section, save to the extent that claims based on
the supply of faulty goods or goods not otherwise in accordance with the contract (non-conformity with sample or description,
late delivery etc.) are generic to all supply of goods and the precedents here can be used with the necessary adaptations to
cover all supply.
The statutory framework
25-02

Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content, UKBC-BULLENL 459372274 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Sale of goods has been codified for over 120 years. The principal statute is the Sale of Goods Act 1979 (SGA). This was
substantially amended in the 1990s, partly to bring the sections importing contractual terms relating to the quality and condition
of goods sold up to date and partly to increase the remedies, particularly those of consumers, for breach of contract by suppliers.
The supply of goods by hire-purchase was covered by the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 and by simple hire by the
Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982. All three statutes provided for contracts to contain implied terms as to the supplier’s
title and the quality and fitness of the goods supplied. It is important to note that where the customer is not within the statutory
definition of a ‘consumer’, the CRA will not apply and his rights will continue to be governed by these statutes.
The CRA, which came into force on 1 October 2015 and applies to contracts made on or after that date, replaced the main
provisions of the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 and the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982, but only replaced
those parts of the SGA which impacted on title, fitness etc and remedies. Sadly, this has resulted in the SGA no longer being a
“one-stop shop” for sale of goods law where consumers are concerned: some provisions of the SGA will continue to apply.
In respect of consumer contracts, the CRA made some changes to sale of goods law. The rules relating to rejection of faulty
goods was tightened up and the CRA introduced a two-stage process so that a buyer can ask for defective goods to be repaired
or replaced and can then reject them if the repair or replacement does not cure the defect.
The other main innovation of the CRA has been noted in that the supply of digital content is now firmly brought within a régime
where supply contracts are subject to statutory terms as to delivery, fitness, quality and condition.
The rules relating to exemption clauses in consumer contracts contained in the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 and the Unfair
Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999 (SI 1999/2083) have also been replaced in the case of consumer supplies by a
unified code in the CRA. The 1977 Act, however, continues to apply in the case of non-consumer supplies.
It is vital to remember at all times that the CRA only applies to consumer contracts. Contracts where the “customer” (whether
for goods or services) is not a consumer continue to be governed entirely by the “old” law.
Definitions
25-03
Before dealing with the substantive law, therefore, it is necessary to examine the new categories of party to a supply contract.
The CRA s.2(3) defines consumer as follows: “Consumer means an individual acting for purposes that are wholly or mainly
outside that individual’s trade, business, craft or profession”—thus adding the concept of purposes mainly but not exclusively
outside business: what the addition of “craft” achieves is anyone’s guess. It should be noted that a purchaser of second hand
goods at a public auction which he has had the opportunity of attending in person is not treated as a consumer under CRA except
in relation to pre-contract representations (CRA s.11(4) and (5)), delivery (CRA s.28) and risk (CRA s.29)—CRA s.2(5) and (6).
The 2015 Act adds an important new definition (not mirrored in the 1979 Act) of a “trader”. This is defined as “a person acting
for purposes relating to that person’s trade, business, craft or profession, whether acting personally or through another person
acting in the trader’s name or on the trader’s behalf”. In other words, the rules relating to traders apply whether the trader is
contracting personally or through an agent.
As in the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 and subsequent legislation, the term “business” is defined by the CRA as including
the activities of government departments and local and public authorities. The definition of “goods” will be considered in the
following.
In the SGA the producer is defined as the manufacturer of the goods, their importer into the EU or any person who purports
to be the producer by placing his name or trade mark on the goods. This is slightly expanded in the CRA (s.59(1)) but without
changing the substance. The term “guarantor” is used by the SGA to connote any person who issues a consumer guarantee,
itself defined as an undertaking given without extra charge to reimburse the price, or to replace, repair or handle goods which
do not meet the specifications in the guarantee or in relevant advertising. The CRA defines “guarantee” as an undertaking to
the consumer given without extra charge by a person acting in the course of the person’s business (the “guarantor”) that, if the
goods do not meet the specifications set out in the guarantee statement or in any associated advertising—

Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content, UKBC-BULLENL 459372274 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
(a)the consumer will be reimbursed for the price paid for the goods, or
 
(b)the goods will be repaired, replaced or handled in any way.
Prior to the CRA, the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 included s.12 which meant that a “consumer” could in some circumstances
include a corporation. In the bizarre decision of the Court of Appeal, Feldarol Foundry Plc v Hermes Leasing (London) Ltd, 2
the court actually held a public limited company to have ‘dealt as consumer’ when acquiring a Lamborghini for its chairman to
drive. The CRA, however, brought UCTA into line with other consumer law by requiring a ‘consumer’ to be a natural person.
25-04
A contract of sale is defined by SGA s.2(1) as:
“a contract by which the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer for a money
consideration called the price.”
The essential elements are thus the transfer of property (contrast bailment) and the payment of a monetary price (contrast
exchange). Where property passes to the buyer on agreement, there is a “sale” (SGA s.2(4)) and where property is to pass at
some future time, there is an “agreement to sell” (SGA s.2(5)).
The CRA is a unifying statute and seeks to treat the supply of goods to consumers as a single topic with (so far as the context
permits) identical rights and rules. Thus CRA s.3 provides that Ch.2 of the Act applies to “a contract for a trader to supply goods
to a consumer” by means of “a sale contract”, “a contract for the hire of goods”, “a hire-purchase agreement” or “a contract
for the transfer of goods”. There are exclusions for supply of currency, sale by way of execution, contracts operating by way
of security and gratuitous contracts.
The CRA contains a detailed definition of a “sales contract”:
 
“(1)A contract is a sales contract if under it—
 
(a)the trader transfers or agrees to transfer ownership of goods to the consumer, and
 
(b)the consumer pays or agrees to pay the price.
 
(2)A contract is a sales contract (whether or not it would be one under subsection (1)) if under the contract—
 
(a)goods are to be manufactured or produced and the trader agrees to supply them to the consumer;
 
(b)on being supplied, the goods will be owned by the consumer, and
 
(c)the consumer pays or agrees to pay the price.
 
(3)A sales contract may be conditional (see s.3(5)), but in this Part conditional sales contract means a sales
contract under which—
 
(a)the price for the goods or part of it is payable by instalments, and
 
(b)the trader retains ownership of the goods until the conditions specified in the contract (for the payment
of instalments or otherwise) are met; and it makes no difference whether or not the consumer possesses
the goods.”
As it is so closely allied to a contract for the sale of goods, it is worth setting out here the basic rule for the application of the
CRA to a digital content contract in CRA s.33:
 
“(1)This Chapter [3] applies to a contract for a trader to supply digital content to a consumer, if it is supplied
or to be supplied for a price paid by the consumer.
 
(2)This Chapter also applies to a contract for a trader to supply digital content to a consumer, if—

Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content, UKBC-BULLENL 459372274 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
 
(a)it is supplied free with goods or services or other digital content for which the consumer pays a price,
and
 
(b)it is not generally available to consumers unless they have paid a price for it or for goods or services
or other digital content.
 
(3)The references in subsections (1) and (2) to the consumer paying a price include references to the consumer
using, by way of payment, any facility for which money has been paid.
 
(4)A trader does not supply digital content to a consumer for the purposes of this Part [1] merely because the
trader supplies a service by which digital content reaches the consumer.”
25-05
“Goods” are defined by SGA s.61 as including:
“all personal chattels other than things in action and money … and in particular goods includes emblements,
industrial growing crops, and things attached to or forming part of the land which are agreed to be severed before
sale or under the contract of sale.”
Things in action includes shares, bills and cheques but although “money” is excluded, this does not affect the sale of coins and
bank notes as collector’s items. The goods may be in existence at the time of the agreement or may come into existence at some
future time (“future goods”): SGA s.5.
The CRA defines goods as “tangible moveable items, but that includes water, gas and electricity if and only if they are put up
for supply in a limited volume or set quantity”—CRA s.2(8).
The CRA adds a new and important definition: “Digital content means data which are produced and supplied in digital form”.
This does away (so far as consumers are concerned) with the debate as to whether digital content had to be supplied by means
of a tangible item (such as a disc) for the provisions of the SGA to apply (whether directly or by analogy).
Principal obligations
25-06
The principal obligations of the seller are to transfer property in the goods to the buyer and to deliver the goods. Those of the
buyer are to accept the goods and to pay the price: s.27. Those obligations are concurrent and:
“the seller must be ready and willing to give possession of the goods to the buyer in exchange for the price and
the buyer must be ready and willing to pay the price in exchange for possession of the goods” (s.28).
This remains unaffected by the CRA.
The price
25-07
The parties may agree upon a price at the outset or may agree a manner of fixing the price or the price may be determined by
the parties’ course of dealing but, if the price is not fixed in any of these ways, the buyer must pay a reasonable price (SGA
s.8). If the price is to be fixed by third party valuation and the valuation is not made, the agreement is avoided unless goods

Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content, UKBC-BULLENL 459372274 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
have been delivered to and appropriated by the buyer, in which case he must pay a reasonable price for them (SGA s.9) These
rules remain unaffected by the CRA.
Passing of property as between buyer and seller
25-08
The basic rules for the passing of property in the SGA are expressly preserved in the CRA. In general, property in the goods
passes when the parties intend it to pass (SGA s.17) but, if the goods are unascertained at the time of the agreement, property
does not pass until they are ascertained (SGA s.16). There is now an exception to SGA s.16 where the goods form part of an
identified “bulk” and the buyer has paid for some or all of the goods. In that case the buyer becomes an owner in common of
the bulk and owner of an undivided share (SGA s.20A).
SGA s.18 lays down rules for the passing of property in default of agreement to the contrary. The most important of these is
r.1, whereby an unconditional contract for the sale of specific goods in a deliverable state passes the property to the buyer when
the contract is made, even if delivery or payment are postponed. Rules 2 and 3 provide that where work has to be done to make
the goods deliverable or where they have to be weighed, measured or tested to ascertain the price, property passes when this
has been done and the buyer notified. Rule 4 makes provision for goods on approval or sale or return and r.5 provides that the
property in unascertained or future goods passes when goods of that description are appropriated to the contract—delivery to
the buyer or to a carrier for delivery to the buyer being, in most cases, an unconditional appropriation.
The rules relating to risk, however, do appear in both the SGA and the CRA. For non-consumer sales the old rule in the SGA is
retained whereby the risk in the goods remains with the seller until property passes to the buyer when the risk also passes to the
buyer, whether or not delivery has been, made (s.20). If either party is at fault in delaying delivery, the risk of loss that would
not have occurred but for that fault is on the party at fault (s.20(2)). For consumers, however, SGA s.20(4) of the Act provides
that the risk remains with the seller until the goods are delivered. This is expanded slightly by CRA s.29 which provides that
goods remain at the trader’s risk until they come into the physical possession of the consumer or a person identified by the
consumer to take possession of the goods, though the latter excludes delivery to a carrier unless the carrier is both engaged by
the consumer and not chosen from a list provided by the trader.
Digital content supplied in tangible form (e.g. a disc) the rules relating to passing of property and risk are as for goods but where
the digital content is to be supplied by transmission to a device (e.g. computer or smartphone) supply is complete (and risk
passes) only when the content reaches the device or, if earlier, when it reaches another trader chosen by the consumer to supply,
under a contract with the consumer, a service by which digital content reaches the device (e.g. a server provider)—CRA s.39.
Passing of title
25-09
The general rule of the SGA is that a seller who is not the owner or is not selling with the owner’s consent or authority, confers
no better title on the buyer than he had himself (unless the owner is estopped by his conduct from denying the seller’s authority
to sell: SGA s.21). (The extent to which the rule forms a contractual term will be discussed later.) This rule, sometimes called
the rule that nemo dat qui (or quod) non habet, is subject to several exceptions none of which has been disturbed by the CRA.
With the disappearance of the rule relating to market overt, the principal remaining exceptions are:
 
(a)a seller who has a voidable title to the goods (e.g. because he has obtained them from the true owner by fraud) will pass
a good title to a bona fide purchaser provided he sells them before the true owner avoids his title (SGA s.23); and see, for
example Lewis v Averay 3 : note that a seller whose title is void ab initio (e.g. under a contract that is illegal or ultra vires
the seller) cannot pass title under this section;
 
(b)a seller who remains in possession of the goods after a sale and delivers or transfers the goods under a sale, pledge or
other disposition to a bona fide recipient, will pass title to that recipient (although the original buyer will have an action in
damages against the seller for non-delivery: SGA s.24). He must, however, remain in possession of the goods in his capacity

Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content, UKBC-BULLENL 459372274 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
as seller; a seller who sells to a finance company on a sale and leaseback arrangement while remaining in possession of the
goods throughout is treated as notionally having delivered the goods to the finance company as seller and having received
them back as bailee and a further sale by that seller will not pass title 4 ;
 
(c)a buyer who is let into possession of the goods with the consent of the seller and delivers or transfers the goods under a
sale, pledge or other disposition to a bona fide recipient will pass title to that recipient (SGA s.25(1)) 5 ; it should be noted
that this section does not apply where the buyer is a buyer under a conditional sale agreement regulated by the Consumer
Credit Act 1974— SGA s.25(2);
 
(d)a mercantile agent who is in possession of the goods with the consent of the owner and delivers or transfers them in
the ordinary course of his business as a mercantile agent under a sale, pledge or other disposition to a bona fide recipient,
will pass title to that recipient (Factors Act 1889 s.2(1)); the mercantile agent must be in possession of the goods in that
capacity and not, for example, selling goods leased or let on hire-purchase to him in his private capacity 6 ;
 
(e)where the goods consist of a vehicle, a hirer under a hire-purchase agreement and a buyer under a conditional sale
agreement can pass title (directly or indirectly through a dealer) to a private purchaser acting in good faith without notice
of the hire-purchase or conditional sale agreement, under Pt III of the Hire-Purchase Act 1964.
Delivery
25-10
As with the passing of title, the SGA contains rules for delivery of the goods, subject to the overriding consideration that what
the parties have actually agreed about delivery will prevail (SGA s.29(1)). In default of agreement:
 
(a)the place of delivery is the seller’s place of business or residence or, if specific goods are to the knowledge of the parties
in some other place, that place is the place of delivery (SGA s.29(2));
 
(b)if the goods are to be sent by the seller, they must be sent within a reasonable time (SGA s.29(3));
 
(c)if the goods are in the hands of a third party, delivery is when the third party acknowledges that he holds them on behalf
of the buyer (SGA s.29(4));
 
(d)demand for and tender of delivery must be at a reasonable hour (SGA s.29(5));
 
(e)the expenses of putting the goods into a deliverable state must be borne by the seller (SGA s.29(6)).
These rules are modified for consumer sales contracts by the CRA. SGA s.29(3) does not apply and is replaced by CRA s.28,
the material parts of which read:
 
“(1)This section applies to any sales contract.
 
(2)Unless the trader and the consumer have agreed otherwise, the contract is to be treated as including a term
that the trader must deliver the goods to the consumer.
 
(3)Unless there is an agreed time or period, the contract is to be treated as including a term that the trader
must deliver the goods—
 
(a)without undue delay, and
 
(b)in any event, not more than 30 days after the day on which the contract is entered into.
 
(4)In this section—
 
(a)an agreed time or period means a time or period agreed by the trader and the consumer for delivery
of the goods;

Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content, UKBC-BULLENL 459372274 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
 
(b)if there is an obligation to deliver the goods at the time the contract is entered into, that time counts
as the ‘agreed’ time.”
Under the SGA, if the seller delivers more or less goods than contracted for, or mixes the contract goods with others, the buyer
has the choice of rejecting the whole consignment, of accepting those goods which are in accordance with the contract and
paying the contract rate for them, or (in the case of over-deliveries) of accepting the whole delivery and paying for the excess
at the contract rate (SGA s.30). In non-consumer sales, the buyer may not be entitled to reject if the difference is “so slight that
it would be unreasonable for him to do so” (SGA s.30(2A)). The rules relating to over and under-delivery are substantially re-
enacted for consumer sales by CRA s.25.
25-11
A buyer is only obliged to take delivery by instalments if he agrees to this (SGA s.31(1) and CRA s.26(1)). Where instalments
have been agreed and each instalment is to be paid for separately, it will be a question of fact in each case whether failure by
the seller to make proper delivery of one or more instalments or failure by the buyer to pay for one or more instalments entitles
the other party to treat the whole contract as repudiated or simply to treat the breach as severable and giving rise to a claim
for what the Act calls “compensation” (SGA s.31(2)) with largely similar rules imposed for consumer contracts by CRA s.26.
“The main tests to be considered in applying [SGA s.31(2)] … are, first, the ratio quantitatively which the breach bears to the
contract as a whole, and secondly the degree of probability or improbability that such a breach will be repeated”. 7
Where the goods are to be sent to the buyer, the rules now diverge. In non-consumer sales, delivery to a carrier is deemed to
be delivery to the buyer and the seller may make any reasonable contract with the carrier for the carriage. If he fails to do so
and the goods are lost or damaged in transit, the buyer may refuse to accept delivery or sue the seller in damages (SGA s.32).
For consumers, none of these rules apply: under SGA s.32(4), delivery of the goods to a carrier is not delivery of goods to the
buyer: only actual delivery will suffice.
Under CRA s.29, as stated earlier, the goods must be delivered into the physical possession of the buyer or a carrier nominated
by him without intervention of the seller.
Acceptance and the right to reject
25-12
Here the distinction between consumer and non-consumer sales is stark. Non-consumer sales are still regulated by the SGA. A
buyer has the right to reject goods tendered or delivered otherwise in accordance with the contract but, once he has accepted
them, the right of rejection is lost. The buyer is entitled to examine the goods before deciding whether to accept or reject them
and must usually be given a reasonable opportunity for examination by the seller (SGA s.35(2)). Until he has had a reasonable
opportunity for examination, the buyer will not be taken to have accepted the goods (SGA s.35(1)). Acceptance occurs when
the buyer notifies the seller he has accepted the goods, when (after an opportunity for examination) he does an act inconsistent
with the rights of the seller or when he retains them after a reasonable time has elapsed without telling the seller he has rejected
them (SGA s.35). If the buyer rejects the goods, he is not obliged to re-deliver them to the seller (SGA s.36).
The rules for acceptance and rejection have been clarified by the case of J&H Ritchie Ltd v Lloyd Ltd 8  which decided that
the buyer’s right to reject was a right which the buyer could not be expected to exercise until he had the information that he
needed to make an informed choice. The seller could not refuse to give him the information that he needed to exercise it. If the
information were refused (in Ritchie by the seller refusing to tell the buyer of the nature of the faults the seller had found in the
goods and remedied), the buyer would not be taken as having accepted the goods and thus having lost the right to reject them.
Under SGA s.35A, a buyer who has the right to reject goods by reason of a breach by the seller affecting only part of the goods
but accepts some or all of the unaffected goods, does not lose the right to reject the affected goods.
In consumer sales, the practical effect of the rules relating to acceptance and rejection were in practice replaced by Pt 5A of
the SGA (see para.25-21). These have been in turn replaced and expanded by the CRA and the remedies of consumers are
discussed at para.25-34.

Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content, UKBC-BULLENL 459372274 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
Conditional sale and credit-sale
25-13
Conditional sale is an agreement whereby a seller sells goods to a buyer on terms that the purchase price is paid (normally with
interest) by instalments and the property in the goods does not pass until the final instalment is paid and is so defined by CRA
s.5(3). It is thus very similar in its structure to hire-purchase. There are, however, two main differences. First, there is no option
to purchase; the sale is concluded at the outset and title passes automatically when the agreement has run its course. Secondly,
the buyer under a conditional sale agreement, being a buyer in possession with the consent of the owner, can pass a good title
to a sub-buyer under s.25(1), although this provision is much curtailed by the exemption from this section of conditional sale
agreements regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974.
As with hire-purchase, conditional sale frequently involves a tripartite relationship between the supplier, the creditor/seller and
the debtor/buyer (see also Section 20: Credit, Finance and Leasing).
Credit-sale is a sale where the purchase price is payable by instalments, but the property passes to the buyer when the agreement
is made. It is thus much closer to the concept of outright sale than to conditional sale in that it gives the seller no security against
the goods in the event of the buyer’s default. Credit-sale also frequently involves a tripartite relationship between the supplier,
the creditor/seller and the debtor/buyer.
A high proportion of conditional sale and credit-sale agreements are already governed by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 and
thus subject to a regime of highly specialised and technical rules applied by that Act to such contracts. The number of such
agreements regulated by the CCA was greatly augmented when the Consumer Credit Act 2006 abolished the financial limits
for control of credit and hire agreements on 6 April 2008. Unless expressly exempted from regulation by the CCA or by the
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Regulated Activities) Order 2001 (SI 2001/544) (the RAO), all conditional sale and
credit sales are now regulated. Actions involving agreements regulated by the 1974 Act and the complicated pleading rules
applied to them are covered in Section 20: Credit, Finance and Leasing.
Distance selling
25-14
The law of sale of goods was modified by the Consumer Protection (Distance Selling) Regulations (SI 2000/2334) which
has since been replaced by the Consumer Contracts (Information, Cancellation and Additional Charges) Regulations 2013 (SI
2013/3134).
These Regulations define consumer as a natural person who contracts for purposes which are outside his business. The 2000
and 2013 Regulations apply to most types of sale of goods or services and require the supplier to provide the consumer with a
lot of information (including notice of the right to cancel) both before and after the conclusion of the contract.
Regulation 10 of the 2000 Regulations and now Pt 3 of the 2013 Regulations give the consumer a right of cancellation (subject
to limited exceptions) and if notice of cancellation is given, it is as if the contract had never been made. If the supplier has given
all the requisite information, the consumer has seven days from the contract being concluded (or if the information is given
post-contract) from the date the information was given. In all other cases the consumer has three months plus seven working
days from delivery of the goods (supply of goods) or the conclusion of the contract (supply of services).
On cancellation, all sums paid by or on behalf of the consumer must be reimbursed and all security returned, and any related
credit agreement is automatically cancelled by the same notice, again with sums reimbursed and security returned. Any credit
paid to the consumer must be repaid. Pending return of goods, the consumer must retain possession and take reasonable care
of them.
It should be noted that the 2000 and the 2013 Regulations also contain very drastic provisions against inertia selling.

Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content, UKBC-BULLENL 459372274 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
“Doorstep selling”
25-15
The Cancellation of Contracts made in a Consumer’s Home or Place of Work etc Regulations 2008 (SI 2008/1816) which came
into force on 1 October 2008 made a whole range of contracts concluded away from business premises cancellable by the
consumer. There are exceptions (listed in Sch.3 to the Regulations). The most significant for the purposes of sale of goods are
the supply of extensions, patios and conservatories, the supply of foodstuffs by regular roundsmen and certain sales of goods by
catalogue. These regulations were replaced but substantially re-enacted by the Consumer Contracts (Information, Cancellation
and Additional Charges) Regulations 2013 (SI 2013/3134).
These contracts must contain prescribed formulae and a cancellation notice will be unenforceable if they do not, though they
remain enforceable by the consumer. The consumer may cancel the contract by serving a written notice of cancellation on the
trader, or on any other person specified in the notice of cancellation rights as a person to whom notice of cancellation may
be given, within the period of seven days following the making of the contract. Except as otherwise provided, a cancelled
contract is to be treated as if it had never been entered into by the consumer. Any sum paid under or in contemplation of the
contract is repayable and if the consumer or any other person on his behalf is in possession of any goods he is given a lien
on them to secure repayment. Security provided in relation to the contract is to be treated as never having had effect, and any
property lodged with the trader solely for the purposes of that security is to be returned by him forthwith. Notwithstanding
the cancellation of a contract under which credit is provided, the contract remains in force so far as it relates to repayment of
credit and payment of interest.
Cancellation of any contract for goods or services has the effect of automatically cancelling any related credit agreement and
where the credit agreement is a regulated agreement, it is treated as if it had been cancelled under the cancellation provisions
of the CCA 1974 and those provisions will apply (notwithstanding that the agreement may not itself have been cancellable
under the CCA).
Footnotes
1
See St Albans City and District Council v International Computers Ltd [1996] 4 AER 491.
2
Feldarol Foundry Plc v Hermes Leasing (London) Ltd [2004] EWCA Civ 747.
3
Lewis v Averay [1972] 1 Q.B. 198.
4
Michael Gerson (Leasing) Ltd v Wilkinson [2001] Q.B. 514; [2001] 1 All E.R. 148.
5
See National Employers’ Mutual General Insurance Association Ltd v Jones [1990] A.C. 24.
6
Belvoir Finance Co Ltd v Harold G Cole & Co Ltd [1969] 1 W.L.R. 1877.
7
Maple Flock Co Ltd v Universal Furniture Products (Wembley) Ltd [1934] 1 K.B. 148 at 157, per Lord Hewart CJ.
8
J&H Ritchie Ltd v Lloyd Ltd [2007] UKHL 9; [2007] 2 All E.R. 353.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
