To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Seller’s Defences
Denial of right to reject after acceptance of the goods and reliance on affirmation of the contract (sale not subject to
the Consumer Rights Act 2015)
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate document
1.
25-F45
The Defendant admits that it entered into the oral agreement with the Claimant whereby the Defendant agreed to sell and
deliver the goods referred to in the Particulars of Claim.
2.
The Defendant denies that it was in breach of the terms of the agreement alleged in the Particulars of Claim.
3.
It is admitted and averred that by the letter of [date] annexed to the Particulars of Claim, the Claimant purported to reject
the goods. If, which is denied, the Defendant was in breach of the terms of the agreement, at the time of the purported
rejection, the Claimant had accepted the goods and was precluded from rejecting them by the Sale of Goods Act 1979,
ss.11(4) and 35.
Particulars
 
(a)the Claimant notified his acceptance to the Defendant by writing the words “received in good order” on the delivery
note;
 
(b)the Claimant did an act inconsistent with the rights of the Defendant in that on [date] it resold the goods to XY
Limited;
 
(c)the Claimant accepted the goods in that, after the lapse of a reasonable time namely [period], it retained the goods
without intimating to the Defendant that it had rejected them.
4.
Further or alternatively, the conduct set out in paragraph 3 amounted to an affirmation of the agreement and the Claimant
is precluded thereby from treating the agreement as having been repudiated by the Defendant.
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9]
[Statement of truth]

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
