To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: making of the contract
Defences under ss.62 and 63 of the CCA and the Regulations
Version 1: to be used for agreements made before 1 February 2011 and for agreements made after that date which are
excluded from CCA s.61A
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
20-F56
The Defendant denies that the document referred to in the Particulars of Claim constitutes a valid agreement enforceable
by the Claimant.
2.
The document purports to be an agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and thus governed
by the Consumer Credit (Cancellation Notices and Copies of Documents) Regulations 1983 (“the Regulations”).
3.
The document was not a properly executed agreement in that:
 
(a)Contrary to s.62(1) of the CCA, when the unexecuted agreement was presented to the Defendant for his signature,
a copy of it was not delivered to him nor was a copy of the guarantee referred to in the agreement.
 
(b)Contrary to s.62(2) of the CCA, when the unexecuted agreement was sent to the Defendant for his signature, the
Claimant did not send a copy of it or of the document referred to in the agreement, namely a maintenance agreement
in respect of the goods.
 
(c)Contrary to s.63(1) of the CCA, when the unexecuted agreement was presented to the Defendant and became an
executed agreement upon his signature, the Defendant failed to deliver to him a copy of the executed agreement.
 
(d)Contrary to s.63(2) of the CCA, a copy of the executed agreement was not sent to the Defendant.
 
(e)Contrary to regulation 2(1) of the Regulations, the lettering of the copy sent to the Defendant was not easily legible
or of a colour which was readily distinguishable from the colour of the paper.
 
(f)Contrary to regulation 3(1) of the Regulations, the copy sent to the Defendant was not a true copy of the agreement.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4.
In the premises, the purported agreement is not enforceable by the Claimant against the Defendant.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
