Claim against defendant for breach of statutory duty:..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim against defendant for breach of statutory duty:
employment of person subject to prohibition order
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 12 - Financial Services
Claim against defendant for breach of statutory duty: employment of person subject to prohibition order
1.
12-E2
The Defendant is and was at all material times an authorised person within the meaning of the Financial Services and
Markets Act 2000 (“the Act”).
2.
On or about [date] the Claimant entered into a client agreement with the Defendant who was acting by its employee C.D.
under which the Defendant agreed for commission to undertake the discretionary management of a portfolio of shares
and other securities belonging to the Claimant and listed in the Schedule hereto. C.D. was the manager assigned by the
Defendant to the management of the Claimant’s portfolio.
3.
At the date of the client agreement C.D. was the subject of a prohibition order made by the Financial Conduct Authority
pursuant to s.56 of the Act and was employed by the Defendant in his investment business without the consent in writing
of the Financial Conduct Authority.
4.
In employing the said C.D. the Defendant failed to take reasonable care to see that he was not the subject of a prohibition
order. [The Claimant will need to set out its case on the failure to take reasonable care: e.g. that the Defendant failed
to inquire whether the employee was listed in the register of persons subject to prohibition orders kept by the Financial
Conduct Authority under s.347.]
5.
By reason of the Defendant’s employment of C.D. the Claimant has suffered loss.
Particulars
[C.D. sold the listed securities contained in the Claimant’s portfolio and advised the Claimant to invest in a number
of unlisted companies. Each of those companies were controlled by or had a board of directors composed of business
associates of C.D. or relatives of his. The shares in the unlisted companies are illiquid; there is no market for them. The
value of the Claimant’s portfolio has been diminished by the said investments by [amount].]
6.
The Claimant has suffered loss and damage. The Defendant is liable to compensate the Claimant for such damage pursuant
to s.71 of the Act.

Claim against defendant for breach of statutory duty:..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Damages for breach of statutory duty;
 
(2)Interest on such damages pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981;
 
(3)Costs;
 
(4)Further or other relief.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
