Claim for rescission of security granted to bank (or other..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for rescission of security granted to bank (or other lender)
on grounds that it was procured by undue influence where
rebuttable evidential presumption applies; allegation that the
bank had constructive notice of the undue influence
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 18 - Undue Influence
Claim for rescission of security granted to bank (or other lender) on grounds that it was procured by undue influence
where rebuttable evidential presumption applies; allegation that the bank had constructive notice of the undue
influence
1.
18-E4
The Claimant, aged 19, is an employee of A Limited, the first Defendant, for which she works as secretary to the company’s
managing director, Mr B. Mr B is the sole director and shareholder of the first Defendant.
2.
On [date], the Claimant executed an unlimited guarantee of the fist Defendant’s debts to C Bank Plc, the second Defendant,
secured by way of a first legal charge over a freehold property known as and situated at [address], which she had recently
inherited from her grandmother (“the Guarantee” and “the Charge”). Copies of the Guarantee and the Charge are attached
to these Particulars of Claim marked “A” and “B” respectively.
Undue Influence exercised by Mr B
3.
The Claimant reposed trust and confidence in Mr B in relation to the management of her financial affairs. In particular,
the Claimant will rely on the following facts and matters:
5.
At no time has the Claimant been a director of or a shareholder in the Company. The Guarantee transaction was manifestly
disadvantageous to the Claimant. in that the Guarantee was unlimited in scope or amount and (although the Claimant did
not know this when she executed the Guarantee) the liabilities of A Limited amounted to £750,000 at the date of execution
of the Guarantee, which was more than the value of the equity in the property she had inherited.
 
(i)She sought the advice of Mr B in relation to the most appropriate course of conduct upon inheriting the property
from her grandmother which was too large for her then present needs.

Claim for rescission of security granted to bank (or other..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(ii)She sought and took the advice of Mr B in relation to her banking arrangements.
4.
The Guarantee is a transaction which calls for an explanation. In particular, the Claimant relies on the following facts
and matters:
 
(i)At no time was she more than a junior employee of B Limited.
 
(ii)At the time of executing the Guarantee the Claimant’s annual pre-tax salary was £10,000.
 
(iii)The Guarantee was unlimited in scope or amount. Although she did not know it when she executed the Guarantee,
at the time of executing the Guarantee, A Limited was indebted to the second Defendant in the sum of £1.3 million.
 
(iv)The Guarantee was secured by way of charge over the Claimant’s only substantial asset.
5.
In the premises, it is to be presumed that the execution of the Guarantee was procured by the undue influence of Mr B
over the Claimant.
Position of Bank
6.
The relationship between the Claimant and the first Defendant and/ or Mr B was not commercial in nature. The second
Defendant failed to take any, or any adequate, steps to bring home to the Claimant the risk she was running by standing as
surety for the debts of the first Defendant and/or the nature and effect of the transaction.
7.
In particular, but without prejudice to the generality of the above, the second Defendant failed to satisfy itself that the
Claimant had received independent legal advice before executing the Guarantee.
8.
The Claimant relies in particular, but without limitation, on the following facts and matters:
 
(i)On [date], the Claimant was called into Mr B’s office and asked to sign a number of documents, being the Guarantee
and the Charge.
 
(ii)The nature and effect of the documents was not explained to the Claimant, and she was told by Mr B that it was
necessary for the survival of B Limited that she sign the documents.
 
(iii)The Claimant was given no opportunity to take independent legal advice and did not understand the nature and
effect of the Guarantee and Charge.

Claim for rescission of security granted to bank (or other..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
9.
As a consequence of the facts and matters set out above, the second Defendant had constructive notice of the exercise of
undue influence by the first Defendant over the Claimant.
10.
By letter dated [date], the Claimant rescinded the Guarantee; alternatively, does so by service of these Particulars of Claim.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)A declaration that the Guarantee has been rescinded/set aside as having been procured by the undue influence of
Mr B over the Claimant, and that the second Defendant had constructive notice of the undue influence.
 
(2)An order that the second Defendant do deliver up the Guarantee to be cancelled forthwith.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
