To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: events after the making of the contract
Defences arising out of the failure to serve default and other notices
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
20-F62
The Defendant admits he entered into the agreement referred to in the Particulars of Claim. The agreement was an
agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and the Consumer Credit (Enforcement, Default and
Termination Notices) Regulations 1983 (“the Regulations”) applied to it.
2.
The Defendant denies that he was in breach of the agreement either as alleged in the Particulars of Claim or at all.
3.
Alternatively if, which is denied, the Defendant was in breach of the agreement, then the breach is not enforceable by
the Claimant in that:
 
(a)Contrary to s.87(1) of the CCA the Claimant failed to serve on the Defendant any default notice.
 
(b)Contrary to s.88 of the CCA and regulation 2(2)(a) of the Regulations, the default notice served on the Defendant
did not state that it was served under s.87(1) of the CCA.
 
(c)Contrary to s.88 of the CCA and regulation 2(2)(b) of the Regulations, the default notice did not contain the
information set out in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 6 and 8 of Schedule 2 to the Regulations.
 
(d)Contrary to s.88 of the CCA and regulation 2(2)(c) of the Regulations, the default notice did not contain statements
in the form specified in paragraphs 4, 5, 7, 9 10 and 11 of Schedule 2 to the Regulations.
 
(e)Contrary to s.88 of the CCA and regulation 2(4) of the Regulations, the default notice was neither easily legible
nor of a colour which was readily distinguishable from the colour of the paper.
 
(f)Contrary to s.88 of the CCA and regulation 2(5) of the Regulations, the statements in the default notice which
were required to be in a form specified in a schedule to the Regulations were not afforded more prominence than
other lettering in the notice and, where words were shown in capital letters and underlined in the Schedule to the
Regulations, they were not afforded even more prominence in the default notice.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(g)Contrary to s.88 of the CCA and regulation 2(6) of the Regulations, the wording of the default notice failed to
reproduce the wording of the Schedule to the Regulations without alteration or addition.
 
(h)Contrary to s.88(1)(a) of the CCA, the default notice failed to state the nature of the alleged breach.
 
(i)Contrary to s.88(1)(b) of the CCA, the default notice failed to state what action was required to remedy the breach
or the date before which the Action was to be taken.
 
(j)Contrary to s.88(2) of the CCA, the default notice specified a date for remedying the breach which was less than
[seven] [14] days after the date of service of the default notice.
 
(k)Contrary to s.88(3) of the CCA, the default notice treated as a breach failure to comply with a provision of the
agreement which became operative only upon breach of some other provision.
 
(l)Contrary to s.88(4) of the CCA, the default notice failed to contain any information about the consequences of
failure to comply with it.
 
(m)Contrary to s.88(4A) of the Act the default notice did not contain a copy of the current default information sheet
pursuant to s.86A of the Act.
4.
Further or alternatively if, which is denied, the Claimant did serve upon the Defendant a valid default notice, then the
Defendant has complied with the requirements of that notice within the prescribed time and any breach by the Defendant
of the agreement is to be treated as never having occurred.
[Statement of truth]
Note
It has been obligatory to serve a “default information sheet” (an OFT official document) with a default notice since 6 April 2008.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
