No statutory form for reply, UKBC-BULLENL 459371705 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
No statutory form for reply
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: pre-contract events
Reply by lender to a defence based on the absence of a licence or Authorization
No statutory form for reply
1.
20-F49
By way of reply, the Claimant denies the validity of the defence.
2.
The Claimant admits that at the time of the agreement it was not the holder of a licence under the Consumer Credit Act
1974 (“the CCA”).
3.
By an order dated [date] made by the Office of Fair Trading pursuant to s.40 of the CCA, the Director ordered that all
agreements made by the Claimant during the period [date] to [date] were to be treated as if the Claimant had been the
holder of the appropriate licence.
4.
In the premises, the said agreement is enforceable by the Claimant in all respects as if the Claimant had been the holder
of the licence under the CCA at the date when the agreement was made.
Or
2.
The Claimant admits that the Defendant was introduced to the Claimant by the said PQ and that the said PQ was not the
holder of a licence under the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”).
3.
By an order dated [date] made by the Office of Fair Trading pursuant to s.149 of the CCA, the Director ordered that all
agreements made by the Claimant during the period [date] to [date] arising from introductions by the said PQ were to be
treated as if the said PQ had been the holder of an appropriate licence at the time of each such introduction.

No statutory form for reply, UKBC-BULLENL 459371705 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4.
In the premises, the agreement is enforceable by the Claimant in all respects as if the Defendant had been introduced to
the Claimant by a person holding a valid credit-broker’s licence at the time when the introduction was made.
Or
2.
The Claimant admits that at the time of the agreement it was not authorised under the Financial Services and Markets
Act 2000 (FSMA).
3.
By written notice dated [date] issued by the Financial Conduct Authority under s.28A of FSMA the Claimant was allowed
to enforce the agreement.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
