Defence by mortgagor alleging non-execution of mortgage..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defence by mortgagor alleging non-execution of mortgage and
non est factum
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 15 - Mortgages and Charges
Defence by mortgagor alleging non-execution of mortgage and non est factum
1.
15-E1
The Defendant admits that he signed the mortgage dated [date] and appended to the Particulars of Claim for Possession
at “A” (“the Mortgage”).
2.
However, the Defendant denies that the Mortgage was executed as alleged by the Claimant (“the Bank”) or at all.
3.
The Defendant’s case is as follows:
 
(i)On about [date] the Defendant had several discussions with Mr C of the Bank about the question of providing the
Bank with additional security for the overdraft liabilities of the Defendant’s business, X Limited, to the Bank.
 
(ii)However, the Defendant was reluctant to provide a mortgage over his matrimonial home at [address] for the
overdraft liabilities of X Limited. The Bank had already taken as security a legal charge over two other properties
belonging to the Defendant.
 
(iii)The overdraft facilities of X Limited were due to be reviewed by the Bank, and Mr C of the Bank indicated to
the Defendant at a meeting which was held on or about [date] to discuss the renewal of facilities, that the overdraft
facilities would only be renewed if the further security in the form of the Mortgage was given by the Defendant.
 
(iv)The Defendant wished to take advice from his lawyer before giving the additional security, but, as a sign of good
faith, and in order to ensure that the overdraft facilities were renewed by the Bank, the Defendant agreed to sign the
Mortgage in blank.
 
(v)It was agreed between the Defendant and Mr C that the Defendant would meet his lawyer and then telephone Mr
C within a few days to authorise him to complete the mortgage documentation and to execute it on the Defendant’s
instructions. The Mortgage was to be held by the Bank and not used by them until those instructions were given.
 
(vi)Mr C agreed to this and the Defendant accordingly signed the Mortgage deed in blank.
 
(vii)Contrary to the agreement set out above, Mr C completed the Mortgage deed and executed the Mortgage on [date]
without the authority or instructions of the Defendant and before the Defendant had had an opportunity to consult
his lawyer.
 
(viii)Further, the Bank subsequently refused to renew the overdraft facilities for X Limited.

Defence by mortgagor alleging non-execution of mortgage..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4.
For the reasons set out above, the Mortgage deed was to be held by the Bank in escrow pending the fulfilment of the
conditions agreed between Mr C and the Defendant, namely that (1) the Bank agree to renew X Limited’s overdraft facilities
and (2) that the Bank complete the Mortgage documents only in accordance with the Defendant’s authority and telephone
instructions. Neither of these conditions was fulfilled.
5.
Accordingly the Mortgage was never in fact executed by the Defendant.
6.
The Defendant relies in addition on the doctrine of non est factum on the grounds set out above in that the details in the
Mortgage deed were not completed with the authority or consent of the Defendant.
7.
The Defendant denies that the Bank is entitled to rely on the Mortgage. 27
Footnotes
27
A counterclaim for a declaration that the Mortgage is void and for delivery up of the Mortgage and its cancellation may
be inserted here; see the precedent below: Defence by mortgagor alleging undue influence.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
