Remedies for consumers (Sale of Goods Act), UKBC-BULLENL 459372204 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Remedies for consumers (Sale of Goods Act)
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Action for breach of condition or warranty
Remedies for consumers (Sale of Goods Act)
25-34
The objective of the SGA Pt 5A was to provide “additional rights of buyer in consumer cases”. SGA ss.48A to 48F apply where
the buyer is a consumer and the goods do not conform to the contract of sale at the time of delivery (as to non-conformity see
para.25-24). Goods which do not conform to the contract at any time within six months of delivery to the buyer are presumed
not to have conformed at the date of delivery subject to the right of the seller to prove that they did conform on delivery or that
the six-month rule is incompatible with the nature of the goods or of the breach (e.g. perishable goods). This will have obvious
practical effects on arguments about acceptance for defective goods.
The primary right of the buyer is to require the seller to repair or replace the goods—SGA s.48B(1)—and if he does, the seller
must repair or replace the goods within a reasonable time “but without causing significant inconvenience to the buyer” and
bear any necessary costs of doing so (including postage)—SGA s.48B(2). This right is not absolute. It cannot be exercised if
the remedy is impossible or if the remedy chosen is disproportionate to the other (e.g. it is cheaper to repair than to replace) or
if the remedy is disproportionate to having a reduction in the purchase price or to rescission of the contract—SGA s.48B(3).
Disproportionality is assessed by taking into account the value of the goods if they had conformed to the contract, the significance
of the breach and whether the other remedy could be effected without significant inconvenience to the buyer—SGA s.48B(4).
Questions both of reasonable time and significant inconvenience are to be judged by reference to the nature of the goods and
the purpose for which they were acquired—SGA s.48B(5).
The buyer may require the seller to reduce the price or may rescind the contract, if he is precluded by SGA s.48B(3) from
demanding repair or replacement, or if he has required repair or replacement and the seller has failed to do so within a reasonable
time and without significant inconvenience to the buyer—SGA s.48C(1) and (2). If the buyer rescinds, an allowance may be
made against reimbursement of the price to reflect any use the buyer has had of the goods before rescinding—SGA s.48C(3).
If the buyer has required the seller to repair or replace the goods, he must give him a reasonable time to do so and cannot reject
the goods or terminate the contract (or go for the other remedy) until that time has elapsed—SGA s.48D.
The courts are given powers to implement these remedies under SGA s.48E. The court may grant specific performance of the
obligation to repair or to replace but has wide powers in any case involving repair, replacement, abatement of the purchase
price or rescission to award one remedy in place of another and to make orders subject to any conditions it thinks fit (including
ordering the buyer to make an allowance for use of the goods).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
