Full form of Defence: Form 9D, UKBC-BULLENL 459372198 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Full form of Defence: Form 9D
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Seller’s Defences
Denial of non-delivery and reliance on waiver or on the buyer’s breach of contract (no counterclaim)
Full form of Defence: Form 9D
25-F32
Claimant [including reference]
AB Ltd
[address]
Defendant
CD Ltd
[address]
1. How much of the claim do you dispute?
I dispute the full amount claimed as shown on the claim form.
2. Do you dispute this claim because you have already paid it?
No.
Defence
1.
The Defendant admits that it entered into the written contract with the Claimant annexed to the Claim Form whereby the
Defendant agreed to sell and deliver the goods referred to in the Particulars of Claim.
2.
The Defendant admits that he did not deliver the goods referred to in the Particulars of Claim. In a telephone conversation
between GH of the Claimant and KL of the Defendant on [date] the Claimant informed the Defendant that because of
cash-flow difficulties it did not require delivery of them. In the premises, the Claimant waived delivery of the goods and
cannot maintain this claim.
Or

Full form of Defence: Form 9D, UKBC-BULLENL 459372198 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
2.
It was an express or necessarily implied condition of the contract that the Claimant should pay the purchase price within
seven days of invoice. On [date] the Defendant duly rendered an invoice for the purchase price (copy annexed to this
Defence) but the Claimant failed to pay the said invoice or to make any payment either within seven days or at all. Further,
prior to the agreed date of delivery, on [date] a winding-up petition was presented against the Claimant. In the premises
the Defendant was entitled to refuse to deliver the goods to the Claimant.
Or
2.
It was an express or necessarily implied condition of the contract that should pay the purchase price on delivery. On [date]
the Defendant tendered delivery at the Claimant’s warehouse but the Claimant refused to pay the price or any part thereof.
In the premises the Defendant was entitled to refuse to deliver the goods to the Claimant.
3.
In the premises, the Defendant is not liable to the Claimant either as alleged in the Claim Form or at all.
4. If you wish to make a claim against the Claimant (a counterclaim)
No.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
