To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 22 - Factoring
Defence that the debt is not payable
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a separate document
1.
22-F5
The Defendant denies that he owes P Limited the sum of £[..........] as alleged in paragraph 1 of the Particulars of Claim
or at all.
2.
The Defendant is not able to say whether the Claimant is the assignee of the debt referred to in paragraph 1 of the Particulars
of Claim and requires the Claimant to prove the same.
3.
By an oral agreement made on [date], P Limited agreed to purchase the goods referred to in an invoice of the same date,
a copy of which is annexed to this Defence. P Limited has failed to pay the purchase price and the Defendant was and is
entitled to set off against such sums as he owes P Limited the amount of the invoice and interest.
Or
3.
It was an implied condition of the contract between P Limited and the Defendant that the goods were reasonably fit for
purpose and of merchantable and satisfactory condition.
4.
In breach of contract, the goods were defective. [Set out the defects.]
5.
By reason of the defective quality of the goods, the Defendant has suffered loss and damage. [Set out the loss and damage.]
6.
By reason of the breach, the Defendant is entitled to set off against the sum claimed the said damages and interest thereon
in diminution or extinction of the same.
Or

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
3.
The Claimant’s claim is statute-barred by operation of the Limitation Act 1980 in that it arose in [date], that is, in excess
of a period of six years prior to the commencement of these proceedings.
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9B]
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
