Chapter 17 - Stock Exchange, UKBC-BULLENL 459371176 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 17 - Stock Exchange
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 17 - Stock Exchange
17-01
Shares and other securities which are traded on the Stock Exchange in London are investments within the meaning of the
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (FSMA). The conduct of business which consists of or includes the sale and purchase or
other dealings in such shares or securities is a regulated activity under FSMA. 1  The statutory regime under FSMA commenced
and relates to dealings effected on and after 1 December 2001. Authorisation to conduct a regulated activity was formerly
conferred by the Financial Services Authority (FSA) (in place of the Securities and Futures Association, the self-regulating
organisation under the Financial Services Act 1986). Members of the Stock Exchange who were authorised persons for the
purposes of the 1986 Act are treated as having, from the beginning of 1 December 2001, a permission to carry on the investment
activities for which they were authorised. 2  The FSA was renamed the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) by the Financial
Services Act 2012 s.6, inserting Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 s.1A, with effect from 1 April 2013. (See further
Section 12: Financial Services, above.)
Prior to 27 October 1986, dealings on the London Stock Exchange were conducted in the manner described in the 12th edition
of this work under this title. On that date, the method of dealing on the Stock Exchange was radically reformed (the occasion
of these reforms was colloquially known as “Big Bang”) by the abolition of “jobbers”, who formerly acted as middlemen
in securities transactions, and the creation of a market in securities traded directly between member firms. In addition, the
function of brokers was permitted to be carried on by firms and companies owned by persons who are not members of the
Stock Exchange. Any member could act as both jobber and broker and was entitled to register as a market maker in one or more
types of securities. Members were authorised to deal as a principal, as an agent, or as both, subject to Stock Exchange Rules. A
market maker in equities was obliged to display two-way prices on the Stock Exchange Automated Quotations System (SEAQ),
the electronic information system which is at the basis of the reforms. SEAQ has been further developed to convert the Stock
Exchange to entirely electronic quotation systems and transfer systems.
The market known as the Stock Exchange was formerly conducted by The London Stock Exchange Limited (formerly The
Stock Exchange of the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland Limited), the affairs of which were managed by the Council
of the Stock Exchange. It was in effect a mutual company, in which a limited number of shares were owned by members of the
market, who were obliged to transfer their share on ceasing to be a member. In 2001, The London Stock Exchange Limited was
“demutualised” and is now a public limited company whose shares are listed on its own exchange.
It was formerly responsible for the admission of securities to listing under the provisions contained in Pts IV and V of the
Financial Services Act 1986. That responsibility was transferred by the Treasury to the FSA from 1 May 2000 and then to
the FCA from 1 April 2013. Admission of securities to official listing is governed by Pt VI of FSMA. The FCA is the United
Kingdom Listing Authority for the purposes of the EU Directives relating to the harmonisation of conditions for admission to
listing, the publication of listing particulars, and the provision of information by listed companies.
17-02
The current Rules of the London Stock Exchange are available at: https://www.londonstockexchange.com/traders-and-brokers/
rules-regulations/rules-lse.pdf. The current version of the rule book came into effect on 1 July 2019. Definitions are placed at
the front of the document, pp.4–16. Rules relating to members and their conduct, investigation of members and standing of
members (the first chapter) are numbered 1000–1110. Rule 1000 establishes the categories of membership. Rule 1010 provides
that a member firm must at all times be authorised under relevant UK or appropriate overseas legislation, or in the view of the
Exchange be otherwise sufficiently regulated, in respect of capital adequacy, and fitness and probity. By r.1060 a member firm
shall not inform a customer that a trade is subject to the Rules of the London Stock Exchange unless the transaction is “on-

Chapter 17 - Stock Exchange, UKBC-BULLENL 459371176 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Exchange”, which means (definitions, rr.2000 and 3000) either the trade is effected automatically on an exchange order book,
or the transaction is off-order book, one of the parties is a member firm and the trade is effected:
 
(i)in a security admitted to trading on one of the London Stock Exchange markets and the parties agree it shall subject to
the rules of the Exchange at or before the time of the trade; or
 
(ii)an AIM security (the Alternative Investment Market: a more lightly regulated market than the listed securities market,
generally for less liquid investments) not admitted to trading on another EU regulated market, unless the parties agree the
trade is to be effected off-Exchange at or before the time of the trade (and subject to various exceptions).
The Core Trading Rules are set out in rr.1000–1550. These rules provide for the conduct of members between themselves,
including the apportionment of liabilities for non-delivery. Generally, trading must be unconditional, and in securities which
are in issue, and a member firm shall only engage in “when issued” dealing where the Exchange is satisfied that there can be an
orderly market for the trading of that security (rr.1530-1532). Members may not, except in the case of permitted “when issued”
dealing, enter into trades subject to conditions precedent or subsequent (r.1540).
By r.1400, a member firm shall not, in respect of its on Exchange business:
 
(i)do any act or engage in any course of conduct which creates or is likely to create a false or misleading impression as
to the market in, or the price or value of, any security;
 
(ii)cause a fictitious transaction or a false price to be input into the Exchange trading system;
 
(iii)effect a transaction at any price which differs to an unreasonable extent from any firm price displayed on the trading
system in that security;
 
(iv)do, or attempt, any act or engage in any course of conduct, which constitutes or is likely to constitute market abuse
under Regulation 596/2014 3  of the European Parliament and of the Council on market abuse;
 
(v)do any act or engage in any course of conduct which is likely to damage the fairness or integrity of the Exchange’s
markets; or
 
(vi)do any act or engage in any course of conduct which causes, or contributes to, a breach of the Exchange’s rules by
another member firm.
These rules, particularly (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) are directed at the generation of false turnover in securities, for example by “roll-
over” or sale and buy-back transactions by the same customer, and at short-selling.
Rule 1410 prohibits a member firm trading in a security from doing any act the sole or main intention of which is to move the
price of that security or the level of any index of which it is a component.
A member firm is required to ensure that every on Exchange trade effected by it is duly settled (r.5000). This means (guidance to
rr.5000 and 5030) it is responsible for ensuring the delivery of securities on the agreed settlement due date for all its on Exchange
business, whether the member firm sold as agent or principal, and such delivery must be free of any charge or incumbrance.
17-03
Whether the rules and usages of the Stock Exchange are incorporated in the contract between the client and his broker used
to depend on the law relating to usages. 4  This law was doubtful and disputed, and would turn on the reasonableness of the
rule or usage, if the client was in fact ignorant of the existence of the rule. The modern position is that the rules of the Stock
Exchange may be incorporated expressly in each contract on the Exchange, where the member so informs the customer: see
guidance to r.1060.
A contract between a client and a stockbroker is a contract for services. Such a contract is subject to numerous implied terms
at common law. The regulation of investment business by the FCA means that the stockbroker must also comply with the FCA
conduct of business rules which are relevant to the activities of dealing in securities and other investments. At common law,
the primary obligation of the broker is to use reasonable care and skill in executing the client’s orders: he does not contract
absolutely that he will do so. 5  The broker is not entitled to an indemnity for loss or expense incurred under an unreasonable or
unproved custom of the Stock Exchange, 6  nor for losses caused by the default of the broker. 7  On completion of a transaction,
the vendor is under an obligation to deliver a transfer executed by a transferor who is and continues to be ready and willing

Chapter 17 - Stock Exchange, UKBC-BULLENL 459371176 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
that the subject of the transfer shall be vested in the transferee named. 8  The broker has no implied right to carry over seller’s
instructions from one account day to the next. 9  The broker has no implied right to combine orders for several clients. 10  All
such implied terms are however subject to the (usually detailed) express terms agreed between the client and stockbroker.
If the client is a natural person who engages the stockbroker to deal in securities otherwise than in the course of a business
of the client, any terms which are unfair in accordance with statutory standards are unenforceable against the client. 11  The
regulations as to unfair terms make special provision for contracts relating to the supply of financial services and transactions
in transferable securities, financial instruments and other products or services where the price is linked to fluctuations in a stock
exchange quotation or index or a financial market rate that the seller or supplier does not control. Normally, the regulations
deem to be unfair as against a consumer terms which:
 
(i)enable the supplier to terminate a contract of indeterminate duration without reasonable notice except where there are
serious grounds for doing so;
 
(ii)enable the supplier to alter the terms of the contract unilaterally without a valid reason which is specified in the contract;
or
 
(iii)provide for the price of goods to be determined at the time of delivery or allow a supplier of services to increase their
price without in both cases giving the consumer the corresponding right to cancel the contract if the final price is too high
in relation to the price agreed when the contract was concluded. 12
Such terms are not deemed unfair in relation to the termination without notice of the supply of financial services, where there
is a valid reason to do so, the alteration of interest payable to or due from the consumer, or the amount of other charges for
financial services, and the variation in price of transferable securities, financial instruments and other products or services where
the price is linked to fluctuations in a stock exchange quotation or index or a financial market rate that the seller or supplier
does not control. 13
17-04
The overriding regulatory obligations of firms dealing on the Stock Exchange are contained in the FCA Handbook (https://
www.fca.org.uk, tab “handbook”). This states high level principles of the conduct of business, and provides more detailed rules
in the Conduct of Business Sourcebook (COBS), which apply to all regulated activities and firms. The scope of the application
of the rules depends on the nature of the other party, which may be a private customer, or a corporate client, or a market
counterparty, and on the nature of the business conducted, which may include share dealing, stock lending, or corporate finance
business. The principles are:
 
(i)Integrity—A firm must conduct its business with integrity.
 
(ii)Skill, care and diligence—A firm must conduct its business with due skill, care and diligence.
 
(iii)Management and control—A firm must take reasonable care to organise and control its affairs responsibly and
effectively, with adequate risk management systems.
 
(iv)Financial prudence—A firm must maintain adequate financial resources.
 
(v)Market conduct—A firm must observe proper standards of market conduct.
 
(vi)Customers’ interests—A firm must pay due regard to the interests of its customers and treat them fairly.
 
(vii)Communications with clients—A firm must pay due regard to the information needs of its clients, and communicate
information to them in a way which is clear, fair and not misleading.
 
(viii)Conflicts of interest—A firm must manage conflicts of interest fairly, both between itself and its customers and
between a customer and another client.
 
(ix)Customers: relationships of trust—A firm must take reasonable care to ensure the suitability of its advice and
discretionary decisions for any customer who is entitled to rely upon its judgment.
 
(x)Clients’ assets—A firm must arrange adequate protection for clients’ assets when it is responsible for them.

Chapter 17 - Stock Exchange, UKBC-BULLENL 459371176 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
 
(xi)Relations with regulators—A firm must deal with its regulators in an open and cooperative way, and must disclose to
the appropriate regulator appropriately anything relating to the firm of which that regulator would reasonably expect notice.
The basic rules in COBS apply to the business activities of all firms authorised by the FCA conducting relevant regulated
activities (such as dealing in securities as agent or principal) and not just to those dealing on the Stock Exchange.
COBS 2.1.1 Client’s best interests:
 
“(1)A firm must act honestly, fairly and professionally in accordance with the best interests of its client (the
client’s best interests rule).
 
(2)This rule applies:
 
(a)in relation to designated investment business carried on for a retail client; and
 
(b)in relation to MiFID, equivalent third country business or optional exemption business, for any client
….”
17-05
COBS 2.1.2 Exclusion of liability restricted in relation to designated investment business:
“A firm may not exclude or restrict in its communications with clients any duty it may have under the regulatory
system or rely on such an exclusion or restriction. The rule also reminds firms that consumers are entitled to the
protection of the Unfair Terms Regulations and the Consumer Rights Act 2015.”
COBS 2.2 Obligation to explain to retail clients the nature of designated investments:
“A firm is under an obligation to explain in respect of certain classes of business in a comprehensible manner the
firm and its strategies, the designated investments and related risks, execution venues and associated charges.”
COBS 2.3.1 Inducements and commissions:
“A firm is prohibited from paying or accepting, in relation to designated investment business, any fee, commission
or non-monetary benefit (i.e. soft commission) unless it is paid to or by the client, or otherwise if it does not impair
compliance with the firm’s duty to act in the client’s best interests and is disclosed to the client.”
COBS 4.2.1 The fair, clear and not misleading rule:
“Firms must ensure that a communication or financial promotion is fair, clear and not misleading.”
Further important rules relating to information provision are contained in COBS 4. COBS 14 regulates information concerning
products to be given to clients. COBS 8 and 8A relate to client agreements. COBS 9 and 9A require a firm to obtain information
from the client in order to assess the suitability of an investment or a trade for that client and to have sufficient information to
determine the level risk and experience of the client. COBS 11 regulates dealing and managing, including the best execution
rules.
Footnotes
1
FSMA s.19; and Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Regulated Activities) Order 2001 (SI 2001/544) arts 14,
21, 87, 89.

Chapter 17 - Stock Exchange, UKBC-BULLENL 459371176 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
2
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Transitional Provisions) (Authorised Persons etc) Order 2001 (SI 2001/2636).
3
Regulation (EU) No 596/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on market abuse (market
abuse regulation) and repealing Directive 2003/6/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission
Directives 2003/124/EC, 2003/125/EC and 2004/72/EC [2014] OJ L173/1.
4
Duncan v Hill (1873) L.R. 8 Ex. 242; Perry v Barnett (1885) 15 Q.B.D. 388; Cunliffe-Owen v Teather & Greenwood
[1967] 1 W.L.R. 1421.
5
Fletcher v Marshall (1846) 15 M. & W. 755.
6
Blackburn v Mason (1893) L.T. 511.
7
Duncan v Hill (1873) L.R. 8 Ex. 242; Johnson v Kearley [1908] 2 K.B. 514; Aston v Kelsey [1913] 3 K.B. 314.
8
Hichens Harrison Woolston & Co v Jackson & Sons [1943] A.C. 266.
9
Re Overweg [1900] 1 Ch. 209.
10
Beckhuson v Hamblet [1901] 2 K.B. 73.
11
Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999 (SI 1999/2083) and Consumer Rights Act 2015—see Section
24 below.
12
SI 1999/2083 reg.5(5) and Sch.2 para.1(g), (j) and (l); Consumer Rights Act 2015 Sch.2, paras 8, 11 and 15.
13
SI 1999/2083 Sch.2 para.2; Consumer Rights Act 2015 Sch.2, paras 22 and 24.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
