Chapter 22 - Factoring, UKBC-BULLENL 459371920 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 22 - Factoring
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 22 - Factoring
22-01
Under a conventional factoring agreement, the finance company agrees to provide a factoring service under which a dealer
assigns his commercial debts to the finance company in return for the immediate payment of a percentage of their value. The
dealer agrees to serve notices of assignment upon his customers, (the debtors). It is then for the finance house to collect the
debts. As the legal assignee of the debt, the finance company is able to sue the debtors in its own name to recover the amount
owing, thanks to the terms of s.136 of the Law of Property Act 1925. When a customer pays the full value of the debt, the finance
house either keeps the balance as payment, or accounts to the dealer for the balance but keeps a percentage as a commission.
The agreements are designed to minimise the exposure of the finance company to the risk of non-payment by the customer.
Thus, it is a wise precaution for the finance company to ensure the debt is not assigned until the dealer has performed his contract
with his customer by delivering the goods or services. The customer is permitted to raise by way of a defence those matters
which he could have raised as a defence if the claim had been brought by the dealer from whom he purchased the goods or
services. In such cases, the agreement may permit the finance company to call for a re-assignment of the debt and the repayment
of sums that it has already paid the dealer. The dealer is then left to proceed against his customer. In some cases, the dealer agrees
to indemnify the finance company where the customer fails to pay by reason of the dealer’s default in the contract of supply.
The finance company’s direct right of action against the debtor depends upon the service of a notice of assignment. Failure
to serve a notice of assignment amounts to a defence for the customer but should render the dealer liable under the terms of
the factoring agreement.
22-02
The recent changes to the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (CCA) and to its attendant statutory instruments have been of considerable
relevance to those who factor agreements regulated by that Act. The position has always been that the definition of “creditor”
and “owner” in s.189(1) of the CCA has been wide enough to encompass assignees of the original creditor or owner. The
amendments made to the CCA by the Consumer Credit Act 2006 (CCA 2006) have imposed on both original creditors and on
assignees much greater burdens to provide information during the currency of the agreement and on termination with the drastic
sanction of the agreement being unenforceable during any period of non-compliance. The fact that many creditors carried out
block assignments of sub-prime agreements to factors or other debt-purchasers without supplying the assignees with adequate
records or copies of documents has led to a multiplicity of defences being available to the debtor sued by an assignee.
The removal of the financial limits for CCA regulation on 6 April 2009 has greatly increased the number (as well as the value) of
regulated agreements. This step obliges those who factor agreements which are (or may be) regulated to consider the technical
niceties at all times.
A fuller discussion, together with the relevant precedents, can be found in Section 20: Credit, Finance and Leasing.
The position where an agreement regulated under the Consumer Credit Act 1974 is assigned by the creditor to an assignee two
points should be noted. First CCA s.82A imposes a statutory obligation for the assignee to arrange for notice of the assignment
to be served on the debtor (in general) as soon as reasonably possible after the assignment.
Secondly, there had been some doubt as to whether all the provisions of the CCA applying to creditors applied to assignees of
creditors. Those doubts were laid to rest in Jones v Link Financial Ltd, 1  which decided that an assignee possesses the same
rights and is subject to the same obligations as the original creditor.

Chapter 22 - Factoring, UKBC-BULLENL 459371920 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
1
Jones v Link Financial Ltd [2012] EWHC 2402 (QB); [2013] 1 W.L.R. 693.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
