Pleading, UKBC-BULLENL 459372235 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Pleading
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Pleading
25-45
With the exception of actions by a seller to enforce a conditional sale agreement, there are no special rules of pleading governing
actions relating to sale of goods. Conditional sale agreements (which are lumped with hire-purchase for this purpose) are subject
to strict rules to be found in the CPR Pts 7 and 16 (and their Practice Directions). It is important to note that these rules apply to
all conditional sale and hire-purchase actions and not just to those arising out of agreements regulated by the Consumer Credit
Act 1974. They can be found in Section 20: Credit, Finance and Leasing. It should, however, be borne in mind that a seller
suing for the purchase price of the goods is pursuing a debt claim and may in certain circumstances be obliged to conform
to Protocol XIII.
Seller’s actions
25-46
The choice to be made is whether to sue for the price or to sue for damages for non-acceptance. If the latter is chosen, it will
be necessary to formulate both the damages based on the fall of the market or current price and the damages under the other
heads of loss 28 .
Buyer’s actions
25-47
Here it is important to distinguish between actions where the buyer is a consumer and where he is not. In non-consumer cases,
apart from the infrequent occasions where specific performance of the contract is sought, these will be actions for damages for
non-delivery or late delivery or actions for damages for breach of express or implied conditions or warranties.
In all cases, if a particular purpose for which the goods were being bought was communicated to the seller or credit-broker and
is sought to be relied on in support of a condition of reasonable fitness under SGA s.14(3) or CRA s.10, that purpose and its
communication should be pleaded. If a sale by description is relied on, the description should be formulated and pleaded and,
with a sale by sample or model, the submitting of the sample or the display of the model to the consumer should be set out.
In consumer cases, the pleader will need to ascertain which of the several remedies offered by the original Act, by the new Pt
5A or by the CRA is appropriate. The buyer may have sought to have the goods repaired or replaced and have been refused by
the seller. The relative merits of rescission and abatement of the purchase price may have to be considered. In many cases, it
may be necessary to seek alternative relief with a claim for damages as a “catch-all” at the end.
Damages will also need careful formulation and, if the actual or imputed knowledge of the seller as to such matters as the likely
resale of the goods is relevant to a head of damage (e.g. loss of profit on resale), this should be pleaded.

Pleading, UKBC-BULLENL 459372235 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
28
Bence Graphics International Ltd v Fasson UK Ltd [1998] Q.B. 87
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
