Arbitration Claim Form for Application for Permission to..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Arbitration Claim Form for Application for Permission to
Appeal and Application for Extension of Time
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part A - Arbitration
Chapter 3 - Appeals on Points of Law (Section 69)
Arbitration Claim Form for Application for Permission to Appeal and Application for Extension of Time
3-A1

Arbitration Claim Form for Application for Permission to..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Remedy claimed and grounds on which claim is
made
1.
The Claimant applies for permission to appeal pursuant to s.69 of the Arbitration Act 1996 (the “Act”). The appeal is
against the finding made by the arbitral tribunal (the “Tribunal”) in paragraphs 42 to 57 of the arbitration award (the
“Award”) that clause 32.1 of the Sale and Purchase Agreement (the “Contract”), properly construed, excludes liability for
loss of profit in the event of a breach of the Contract by the Defendant.
2.
The statutory requirements set out in s.69(3) of the Act have been satisfied in relation to the appeal for which permission
is being sought and the grounds on which the Claimant seeks permission to appeal are as follows:
 
(a)Determination of the question will substantially affect the rights of one or more of the parties as it relates to the
Claimant’s entitlement to recover the sum of £10 million by way of lost profit.
 
(b)The question is one which the Tribunal was asked to determine.
 
(c)On the basis of the findings in the Award, the decision of the Tribunal on the question is obviously wrong as it is
premised on an incorrect construction of clause 32.1 of the Contract. Clause 32.1 does not exclude recovery of lost
profit insofar that it is to be regarded as direct loss.
 
(d)Despite the agreement of the parties to resolve the matter by arbitration, it is just and proper in all the circumstances
for the Court to determine the question. The question for which permission to appeal is sought relates to a point of
interpretation which can be resolved by reference to the Contract itself.
3.
The Claimant asks that the Court vary the finding in paragraph 57 of the Award so as to hold that the Claimant’s claim for
loss of profit is direct in nature and thus not excluded by clause 32.1 of the Contract.
4.
The Claimant also applies for an extension of time pursuant to s.80(5) of the Act and/or CPR, r.62.9 within which to appeal
against the Award, on the grounds that: (a) the circumstances which led to the delay in this appeal being brought was not
due to fault on the part of the Claimant and was a result of the Award having been sent by the Tribunal to the wrong e-mail
and postal addresses; (b) the Claimant acted reasonably and with appropriate expedition as soon as the position became
clear to it; (c) resulting in arbitration claim forms being issued 48 hours upon receipt of the Award; (d) the Defendant will
suffer no irremediable prejudice if the application is allowed; and (e) by contrast, it would be unfair to the Claimant to be
denied the opportunity of having its application for permission to be determined.
5.

Arbitration Claim Form for Application for Permission to..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
The Claimant further applies for such further or other relief as may be appropriate including, but not limited to, the costs
of these proceedings.
6.
Appended to this claim form are copies of: (a) the Award; (b) the Claimant’s skeleton argument; and (c) the witness
statement of [Witness] in support of this claim.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
