Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1 or served
subsequently
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part A. - Claims by the Creditor or Owner against the Debtor or Hirer
Credit tokens (regulated agreements)
Claim arising out of the misuse of a credit token against the card-holder (First Defendant) and a third-party user of
the card (Second Defendant)
Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1 or served subsequently
1.
20-F18
By an agreement in writing dated [date], the Claimant agreed to issue to the First Defendant a credit token, namely an
Xcard, for the purpose of acquiring goods and services on credit. A copy of the agreement is annexed to this Claim Form.
2.
The agreement was regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and this is a Consumer Credit Act claim.
3.
Clause 6 of the agreement provided that the First Defendant should not part with possession of the Xcard to any other
person and should not permit any other person to make use of it.
4.
At a date unknown to the Claimant but prior to [date] in breach of the said agreement, the First Defendant delivered the
Xcard to the Second Defendant and permitted the Second Defendant to make use of it.
5.
Between [date] and the expiry of the validity of the Xcard on [date] the Second Defendant wrongfully made use of the
Xcard to acquire goods and services to the total value of £[..........].
6.
By reason of the said agreement and pursuant to s.84 of the CCA, the First Defendant is liable to repay to the Claimant
the said sum of £[..........] and interest thereon at the Claimant’s current interest rate.
7.
In the circumstances, the Second Defendant is jointly and severally liable with the First Defendant to pay to the Claimant
the said sum and interest.

Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
8.
Despite requests made by and on behalf of the Claimant, neither the First Defendant nor the Second Defendant has repaid
the said sum or any part thereof or any interest thereon. At the date of the summons in this action, there is due the further
sum of £[..........] by way of accrued interest.
The Claimant therefore claims against the First and Second Defendants jointly and severally:
 
(1)£[..........] sums due in respect of transactions using the Xcard.
 
(2)£[..........] contractual interest accrued from [date when each sum became due] to the date of the issue of the claim
and continuing at the daily rate of £[..........] until judgment.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
