To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part K. - Defence of the Surety
Defences of surety under ss.105 and 111 of the CCA and the Regulations
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
Defence of the Second Defendant
1.
20-F69
The Second Defendant admits that the First Defendant entered into the credit agreement with the Claimant set out in the
Particulars of Claim (“the credit agreement”). The credit agreement was a regulated agreement under the Consumer Credit
Act 1974 (“the CCA”).
2.
The Second Defendant denies that the document referred to in the Particulars of Claim constitutes a valid guarantee
executed by him and enforceable by the Claimant.
3.
The document purports to be a guarantee regulated by the CCA and thus governed by the Consumer Credit (Guarantees
and Indemnities) Regulations 1983 (“the Regulations”).
4.
The document was invalid and/or improperly executed and is unenforceable by the Claimant against the Second Defendant:
 
(a)Contrary to s.105(1) of the CCA, the agreement was not expressed in writing.
 
(b)Contrary to s.105(4)(a) the agreement was not signed by or on behalf of the Second Defendant.
 
(c)Contrary to s.105(4)(b) of the CCA, the agreement did not embody all the terms of the security, other than implied
terms, in that it did not set out the obligation of the Second Defendant to deposit certain property with the Claimant.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(d)Contrary to s.105(4)(c) of the CCA, when the agreement was sent to the Second Defendant for signature it was
not in such a state that its terms were readily legible.
 
(e)Contrary to s.105(4)(d) of the CCA, when the agreement was sent to the Second Defendant for signature the Second
Defendant was not sent a copy of the document.
 
(f)Contrary to regulation 3(1)(a) of the Regulations, the agreement did not contain any heading [alternatively any
heading in the form of words specified in Part I of the Schedule to the Regulations].
 
(g)Contrary to regulation 3(1)(b) of the Regulations, the agreement did not contain the information set out in Part II
of the Schedule to the Regulations in that it did not state the name and a postal address of the lender or owner.
 
(h)Contrary to regulation 3(1)(c) of the Regulations, the agreement did not contain a statement of the rights of the
Surety in the form specified in Part III of the Schedule of the Regulations.
 
(i)Contrary to regulation 3(1)(d) of the Regulations, the agreement failed to contain a signature box in the form
specified in Part IV of the Schedule to the Regulations.
 
(j)Contrary to regulation 3(2) of the Regulations, the agreement did not reproduce the wording prescribed by the
Regulations without alteration or addition.
 
(k)Contrary to regulation 3(5) of the Regulations, where the agreement reproduced words shown in capital letters
in the forms prescribed in Parts III and IV of the Schedule to the Regulations, those words were not afforded more
prominence than other lettering in the form.
 
(l)Contrary to regulation 4(1) of the Regulations, the lettering of the agreement was not easily legible or of a colour
which was readily distinguishable from the colour of the paper.
 
(m)Contrary to regulation 4(2) of the Regulations, the Second Defendant’s signature was not in the signature box.
 
(n)Contrary to s.105(5)(a) of the CCA, the Second Defendant was not provided with a copy of the executed agreement
between the Claimant and the First Defendant and/or was not provided with a copy of a document referred to in it,
namely a maintenance agreement.
 
(o)Contrary to s.105(5)(b) of the CCA, a copy of the executed agreement between the Claimant and the First Defendant
was not sent to the Second Defendant within seven days after such agreement was made.
5.
The Second Defendant denies that the Claimant served on the First Defendant a default notice which complied with
ss.87 and 88 of the CCA or with the provisions of the Consumer Credit (Enforcement, Default and Termination Notices)
Regulations 1983 (“the Enforcement Regulations”). The Second Defendant adopts the matters set out in the Defence of
the First Defendant with regard to the breach of the CCA and the Enforcement Regulations.
6.
In any event the Claimant failed to serve on the Second Defendant any copy of any default notice either as required by
ss.87 and 88 of the CCA and the Enforcement Regulations or at all.
7.
In the premises, the Claimant is in breach of its obligations under s.111(1) of the CCA and by virtue of s.111(2) of the CCA
the Claimant is not entitled to enforce the said guarantee against the Second Defendant either as alleged in the Particulars
of Claim or at all.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
[Statement of truth]
2.
The Defendant admits that it entered into the sale agreement with the Claimant whereby it sold to the Claimant the car
which is the subject matter of this action. It is further admitted that it was a condition of the sale agreement that the
Defendant was the owner of the car and should pass title thereto to the Claimant.
3.
It is denied that the Defendant was in breach of that condition either as alleged in the Particulars of Claim or at all.
4.
It is denied that XY Limited was the owner of the car at any material time and it is averred that at all material times the
Defendant was the owner thereof and lawfully passed title to the Claimant:
 
(a)by a hire-purchase agreement made [date] between XY Limited and PQ (copy annexed to this Defence), XY
Limited let the car on hire-purchase to PQ;
 
(b)by an oral agreement made [date] PQ sold the car to one GH for the sum of £[..........]: GH was a private purchaser
and purchased the car in good faith and without notice of the hire-purchase agreement;
 
(c)GH acquired a good title to the car pursuant to the Hire-Purchase Act 1964, Part III;
 
(d)by a written agreement dated [date] (copy annexed to this Defence) GH sold the car to the Defendant.
5.
In those circumstances, the Defendant acquired a good title to the car prior to the sale thereof to the Claimant.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
