Skeleton Argument in Support of Arbitration Claim Form, UKBC-BULLENL 459370723...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Skeleton Argument in Support of Arbitration Claim Form
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part A - Arbitration
Chapter 3 - Appeals on Points of Law (Section 69)
Skeleton Argument in Support of Arbitration Claim Form
3-A2
Claim No. [–]
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
BUSINESS AND PROPERTY COURTS OF ENGLAND AND WALES
COMMERCIAL COURT (QBD)
In an arbitration claim between
[COMPANY A]
Claimant
-and-
[COMPANY B]
Defendant
Claimant’s Skeleton Argument
Introduction
1.
This skeleton argument is served by the Claimant in support of its application pursuant to s.69 of the Arbitration Act 1996
(the “Act”) for permission to appeal on a question of law arising out of an arbitration award (the “Award”) made by the
arbitral tribunal (the “Tribunal”). The Claimant respectfully invites the Court to grant the permission that is sought and to
allow it an extension of time pursuant to s.80(5) of the Act and/or CPR, r.62.9, within which to appeal.
2.
The dispute which forms the subject of the underlying arbitration proceedings relates to a Sales and Purchase Agreement
dated 15 January 2015 for 100,000MT of coal on FOB Balikpapan, Indonesia terms entered into between the Claimant as
seller and the Defendant as buyer (the “Contract”).
3.
The Defendant repudiated the Contract and the Claimant was forced to sell the coal to another purchaser at a considerably
lower price, suffering a loss of profit in the sum of £1 million in the process. The Tribunal found the Defendant in
repudiatory breach but refused to award damages to the Claimant for loss of profit on the basis that this was excluded
by clause 32.1 of the Contract.

Skeleton Argument in Support of Arbitration Claim Form, UKBC-BULLENL 459370723...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4.
The Claimant estimate that it will take the Court approximately two hours to decide, on paper, the applications for
permission to appeal and for an extension of time.
Application for Permission to Appeal
5. Question of law is one which Tribunal was asked to determine (s.69(3)(b))
The question of law to which this appeal relates and for which permission is sought relates to the proper construction of
clause 32.1 of the Contract, which provides as follows: “Neither party shall be liable to the other for loss of profit or any
other indirect loss or consequential damage as a result of a breach of this Agreement regardless of the cause thereof.”
6.
The Tribunal was asked to construe clause 32.1 and its meaning is therefore a question which the Tribunal was asked to
determine. The findings made by arbitral tribunals as to the meaning of the contractual clauses are matters of law: see
Lesotho Highlands Development Authority v Impregilo SpA [2006] 1 AC 221, per Lord Steyn at para.31.
7. Obviously wrong construction of clause 32.1(s.69(3)(c)(i))
The Tribunal had construed clause 32.1 of the Contract so as to find that the Claimant’s claim for loss of profit was excluded
thereby. Its finding in this regard is obviously wrong as the lost profit which the Claimant is seeking recovery of is a direct
loss. The clause should be read disjunctively by reason of the use of the word “or” such that only loss of profit which is
to be regarded as indirect loss or consequential damage is excluded.
8. Rights will be substantially affected by determination of the question (s.69(3)(a))
The question as to the proper construction of clause 32.1 of the Contract is one which substantially affects the rights of the
parties as it relates to the Claimant’s entitlement to recover loss of profit in the sum of £1 million: see Malone 1st, para.6.
9. Just and proper for the Court to determine the question (s.69(3)(d))
It is just and proper in all the circumstances for the Court to determine the question on which this appeal is predicated. It
concerns a point of construction for which no evidence of factual matrix had been adduced in the arbitration and which
the Court is therefore as well-placed as the Tribunal to determine. To the extent that permission is granted, the appeal
is capable of being resolved following a short hearing, but the outcome of which would have a substantial effect on the
rights of the parties.
Application for Extension of Time
10.
The Award is dated 20 April 2015, which means that the 28-day period within which appeals are to be brought fell due
on 18 May 2015. The Award was circulated by e-mail but it was inadvertently sent by the Tribunal to the wrong e-mail
and postal addresses for the Claimant.
11.
The mistake was not discovered until 20 May 2015: see Malone 1st, para 8. The Claimant was thus unable to appeal against
the Award prior to expiry of the relevant period. The fact that the applications for permission to appeal were not brought
within the statutory time limit is inadvertent and not intentional.
12.
Notwithstanding this, the Claimant acted reasonably and with appropriate expedition as soon as it became aware of the
Award. The arbitration claim form was issued within 48 hours of receipt of the Award: see Malone 1st, para.10.

Skeleton Argument in Support of Arbitration Claim Form, UKBC-BULLENL 459370723...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
13.
Applying the criteria laid down in Terna Bahrain Holding Company WLL v Al Shamsi [2013] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 86, per
Popplewell J at para.27, the Claimant respectfully invites the Court to grant the extension of time which is being sought,
pursuant to s.80(5) of the Act and/or CPR, r.62.9 for the following reasons: (a) the circumstances which led to the delay
in this appeal being brought was not due to fault on the part of the Claimant; (b) the Claimant acted reasonably and with
appropriate expedition as soon as the Award was received; (c) resulting in the arbitration claim form being issued within
48 hours on receipt of the Award; (d) the Defendant will suffer no irremediable prejudice if the application is allowed; and
(e) by contrast, it would be unfair to the Claimant to be denied the opportunity of having its application for permission
to be determined.
Conclusion
14.
For the reasons set out in this skeleton argument, the Court is asked to grant the extension of time sought by the Claimant
and to grant it permission to appeal the Tribunal’s determination of the construction of clause 32.1 of the Contract.
LEARNED COUNSEL
ESSEX COURT CHAMBERS
24 LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS
LONDON WC2A 3EG
22 May 2015
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
