To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 21 - Commission Agents
Defences of the Agent
Defence to a claim by principal based on receipt of secret profits, etc
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a separate document
1.
21-F11
It is denied that the Defendant was a commercial agent within the meaning of the Commercial Agents (Council Directive)
Regulations 1993 and thereby owed the Claimant a duty to act dutifully and in good faith.
2.
It is denied that the agreement between the Claimant and the Defendant gave rise to a relationship of trust and confidence
whereby the Defendant owed the Claimant a fiduciary duty as alleged or at all. It is expressly denied that the Defendant
was not permitted to benefit from the payment of commission paid to him by suppliers.
3.
The agreement between the Claimant and the Defendant set out in paragraph 2 of the Particulars of Claim was subject to an
implied term in accordance with the custom and usage in the trade that the Defendant was entitled to receive commission
from suppliers whose goods were purchased by him as the agent of the Claimant.
4.
Further, the Claimant knew that the Defendant was to receive commission from PQ Limited in that invoices in which the
payment of commission was set out were sent to the Claimant when refunds were made. In the premises, the Claimant
agreed to vary and/or waived such term as the contract may have had restricting the Defendant’s right to receive the
payment of commission.
5.
It is admitted that the Defendant has received commission from PQ Limited in the sum of £[..........] but denied that this
amounted to a breach of duty or was a secret profit or that the Defendant is liable to account to the Claimant for the same.
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9B]
[Statement of truth]

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
