Claim for damages for negligence against a financial adviser, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for damages for negligence against a financial adviser
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 2
Part Y - Professional Negligence
Chapter 85 - Professional Negligence
Claim for damages for negligence against a financial adviser
1.
85-Y5
At all material times:
 
(a)the Defendant provided financial advice services and was a “firm” for the purposes of the FCA Handbook (“the
Handbook”); and
 
(b)the Claimant was a “retail client” for the purposes of the Handbook and a “private person” for the purposes of
s.138D of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000.
2.
At a meeting (“the Meeting”) held on or about [date] at the Defendant’s offices and attended by the Claimant and the
Defendant, the Claimant instructed the Defendant that he:
 
(a)had received an inheritance of £120,000 (“the Sum”) which he wished to invest;
 
(b)did not want to expose the Sum to any significant risk of capital loss; and
 
(c)wished to be able to withdraw the Sum from any investment on one month’s notice.
3.
At the Meeting the Defendant agreed to advise the Claimant in respect of the most suitable financial arrangements in
respect of the Sum.
4.
In the premises, it was an express, alternatively implied, term of the contractual retainer between the Claimant and the
Defendant that:
 
(a)the Defendant would advise the Claimant as to the most suitable financial arrangements in respect of the proposed
investment of the Sum; and
 
(b)the Defendant would exercise reasonable care and skill throughout.
5.
Further, or in the alternative, the Defendant was under a duty of care to the Claimant in like terms to the contractual duties
pleaded in paragraph 4 above.

Claim for damages for negligence against a financial adviser, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
6.
In performing the duties identified in paragraphs 4 and 5 above, the Defendant was obliged to comply with its duties under
the Handbook’s Conduct of Business Sourcebook (COBS), which informed those duties, including:
 
(a)to communicate in a fair, clear and not misleading manner (COBS 4.2.1R(1)); and
 
(b)to take reasonable steps to ensure any recommendation was suitable for the Claimant (COBS 9.2.1R(1)).
7.
By a letter dated [date] from the Defendant to the Claimant the Defendant expressly advised that:
 
(a)the Claimant should invest in a “Superior Structured Return Bond” with Southfolk Capital (“the Product”); and
 
(b)the Product was “virtually risk-free” and carried a “guaranteed minimum return” of 2% per annum.
8.
In reliance on the advice set out in paragraph 7 above on [date] the Claimant invested the Sum in the Product.
9.
The said advice was negligent and the Defendant is in breach of contract and/or duty of care and/or the regulatory duties
pleaded at paragraph 6 above as follows.
Particulars of Negligence
 
(a)The Defendant failed to advise the Claimant that the minimum return on the Product was only guaranteed for years
when the FTSE 100 Index did not fall by more than 5%;
 
(b)The Defendant failed to advise the Claimant that withdrawals from the Product were liable to be restricted if the
underlying securities held by Southfolk Capital became illiquid and/or fell significantly in value;
 
(c)By reason of the matters aforesaid the descriptions of the Product pleaded at paragraph 7(b) above were misleading,
alternatively not fair or clear;
 
(d)The Defendant failed to advise the Claimant that he could better achieve his investment objectives by placing the
Sum on a time deposit with a reputable bank or building society.
10.
Further, or in the alternative, the Claimant has an action for damages against the Defendant pursuant to s.138D of the
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 by reason of the Defendant’s aforesaid breaches of the regulatory duties pleaded
at paragraph 6 above.
11.
In the premises, as a result of the matters aforesaid the Claimant has suffered loss and damage.
Particulars of Loss and Damage
[Set out loss and damage suffered.]
12.
Further, the Claimant claims interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 on the amount found to be due to
the Claimant at such rate and for such period as the Court thinks fit.
AND the Claimant claims:

Claim for damages for negligence against a financial adviser, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
(1)Damages as aforesaid.
 
(2)Interest thereon pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
