Defence to a claim for commission arising out of a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defence to a claim for commission arising out of a regulated
agreement: contravention of s.21, defence under s.30
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 12 - Financial Services
Defence to a claim for commission arising out of a regulated agreement: contravention of s.21, defence under s.30
1.
12-E3
The Defendant admits that the Claimant is an authorised person within the meaning of the Financial Services and Markets
Act 2000 (“the Act”).
2.
The Defendant avers that the said agreement was a controlled agreement relating to a controlled investment within the
meaning of s.21 of the Act and is unenforceable against her pursuant to s.30 of the Act on the following grounds
3.
The Defendant entered into the said agreement on the occasion of an unsolicited call at her home address on [date] by A.B. a
representative of X.Y. Limited who was carrying on a regulated activity within the meaning of the Act by soliciting persons
by means of house calls to enter into contracts for investment management services such as those provided by the Claimant;
4.
A.B. was not at that time an authorised person within the meaning of the Act;
5.
The Defendant entered into the said agreement in consequence of a representation by A.B. that a form of investment
management agreement similar to the agreement entered into by the Defendant with the Claimant was appropriate to her
needs and the nature of her investments.
Part 20 Claim
6.
The Defendant repeats her Defence.
7.
On or about [date] the Defendant gave instructions to her solicitors for the transfer by them of the Defendant’s portfolio
of investments to the nominee company controlled by the Claimant and the securities listed in the schedule hereto were
transferred pursuant to the terms of the said agreement.

Defence to a claim for commission arising out of a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
8.
On or about [date] the Defendant paid to the Claimant the sum of [amount] commission for the period [date] to [date]
under the said agreement. The Defendant is entitled to recover the said commission pursuant to s.30 of the Act.
AND the Defendant claims:
 
(1)Repayment of the said sum of [amount];
 
(2)Interest thereon at such rate and for such period as may be just by way of compensation pursuant to s.30(10) of
the Act or under s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981;
 
(3)An order that the Claimant do procure its nominee company to transfer the securities listed in the schedule hereto
to the Claimant or as she may direct;
 
(4)Costs;
 
(5)Further or other relief.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
