Claim for Rescission and statutory damages against Stockbroker, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for Rescission and statutory damages against Stockbroker
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 17 - Stock Exchange
Claim for Rescission and statutory damages against Stockbroker
1.
17-E5
The defendant is a member of the Stock Exchange and carries on business as a stockbroker.
2.
By a client agreement dated [date] the claimant employed the defendant as his stockbroker to purchase on his behalf from
third parties on the Stock Exchange the shares set out in the First Schedule hereto.
3.
By the several contract notes particulars of which are set out in the Second Schedule hereto the defendant represented to
the claimant that it had bought on the said Exchange from third parties the shares referred to in the contract notes.
4.
In reliance on the said representation the claimant paid to the defendant the sum of [amount] being the total price of the
shares, stamp duty, and commission of the defendant as shown in the contract note. [The said shares were registered in
the name of the claimant on [date].]
5.
It was a term [alternatively an implied term] of the client agreement between the claimant and the defendant dated [date]
(a copy of which is annexed hereto) that the defendant would comply with the conduct of business rules of the Financial
Services Authority/Financial Conduct Authority and in particular that the defendant would not act in relation to the claimant
as principal or sell the said shares to the claimant as principal without taking steps to secure that the transaction was fair
as against the claimant.
6.
Further the representation contained in the contract notes was false and the defendant has committed breaches of contract
in that the shares referred to in the contract notes were in reality sold by the defendant to the claimant as principal.
7.
In the premises:
 
(1)The claimant is entitled to avoid and rescind the transactions referred to in the said contract notes and the purchase
by him of the said shares. [The claimant gave notice to the defendant of his intention to rescind the transaction on
discovery of the falsity of the said representation on ---- 20--.]

Claim for Rescission and statutory damages against Stockbroker, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(2)The claimant is entitled to damages for breach of statutory duty pursuant to s.138D of the Financial Services and
Markets Act 2000.
And the claimant claims:
 
(1)Rescission of the said transactions;
 
(2)[Upon transfer of the said shares to the defendant by the claimant] repayment of the said sum of, £[amount] together
with interest thereon at such rate and for such period as may be just by way of equitable relief;
 
(3)Additionally or alternatively damages for misrepresentation or for breach of statutory duty.
Relief claimed
Rescission can be claimed after execution of the contract pursuant to the Misrepresentation Act 1967, and damages can be
awarded in addition to rescission under that Act, e.g. if the sale by the defendant as principal was at a price which reduced
a profit which the claimant might have made on the relevant shares if bought in the market from a third party. For the
statutory cause of action for breach of statutory duty, see Section 12: Financial Services, above.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
