Reply seeking enforcement of agreement under discretion..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Reply seeking enforcement of agreement under discretion of the
Court
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 12 - Financial Services
Reply seeking enforcement of agreement under discretion of the Court
Reply and defence to Part 20 claim
Reply
1.
12-E4
The Claimant does not admit that the said agreement was entered into after a statement made by A.B. to the Defendant
or in consequence thereof.
2.
The Claimant will say that the Claimant had no knowledge of the fact (which the Claimant admits) that at the date of the
said agreement A.B. was not an authorised person within the meaning of the Act.
3.
Further or alternatively it is just and equitable to permit the Claimant to enforce the said agreement by reason of the
following:—
 
(1)A.B. became an authorised person for the purposes of the Act on [date] after the date of the agreement between
the Claimant and the Defendant. When that agreement was made, A.B. had a pending application for permission to
conduct relevant regulated activities including the sale of [investments the subject of the agreement];
 
(2)The agreement between the Claimant and the Defendant is an appropriate form of agreement having regard to the
needs and means of the Defendant;
 
(3)The Claimant has managed the securities of the Defendant pursuant to the said agreement for a period of 2 years,
during which period the value of the Defendant’s portfolio of investments has increased, and has provided her with
a significantly increased income compared with the income of the Defendant’s portfolio prior to the Claimant’s
management;
 
(4)The solicitors for the Defendant informed the Claimant on or about [date] that they could see no grounds for
terminating the said agreement.

Reply seeking enforcement of agreement under discretion..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4.
The Claimant denies on those grounds that the Defendant was influenced to a material extent by anything said or done
in the course of the call by A.B. In any event, the Claimant’s case is that A.B. was not acting on behalf of the Claimant
and did not receive and was not to receive any commission or other inducement in respect of the said agreement from the
Claimant or any person acting on behalf of the Claimant or any appointed representative whose principal the Claimant is.
Defence to Part 20 claim
5.
The Claimant repeats its Reply by way of Defence to the Defendant’s Part 20 claim.
6.
Except as expressly admitted above the Claimant denies each and every allegation in the Part 20 claim as if they were
separately dealt with here.
7.
As a result the Defendant is not entitled to the relief claimed or any relief.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
