To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: pre-contract events
Defences under ss.57 and 59 of the CCA
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
20-F50
The Defendant denies that he entered into the agreement with the Claimant set out in and annexed to the Claim Form or
any agreement.
2.
It is admitted that the Defendant proposed to enter into an agreement in the form set out in the Particulars of Claim and
signed a document in the Claimant’s standard form for such agreement.
3.
Prior to the formation of the agreement, however, on [date] the Defendant gave oral notice of his intention to withdraw
from the prospective agreement pursuant to s.57 of the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) to one PQ a creditbroker
who had acted on behalf of the Claimant in negotiating the prospective agreement alternatively had acted on behalf of
the Defendant in so doing.
4.
By reason of the Defendant’s said withdrawal from the prospective agreement, no agreement between the Claimant and
the Defendant came into effect.
Or
2.
If, which is denied, the Defendant entered into an agreement with the Claimant, the said agreement was an agreement to
enter into a prospective agreement which would have been regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”).
3.
By reason of s.59 of the CCA, an agreement to enter into a prospective regulated agreement is void. Accordingly if, which
is denied, there was an agreement between the Defendant and the Claimant any such agreement is rendered void by that
section.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
