Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1 or served
subsequently
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part D. - Claims by the Lender Against the Supplier
Regulated and unregulated agreements
Claim by lender under a hire-purchase agreement against the supplier for damages for breach of warranties by the
supplier as to the truth of statements in the hire-purchase agreement or guarantee
Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1 or served subsequently
1.
20-F29
The Claimant is a finance company and the Defendant is [state nature of Defendant’s business].
2.
On [date] the Defendant sent to the Claimant the following documents:
 
(a)a document in the Claimant’s standard form of hire-purchase agreement (“the hire-purchase agreement”) completed
with details of a transaction whereby the Claimant would let on hire-purchase to one PQ, [identify the goods] (“the
goods”);
 
(b)a document in the Claimant’s standard form of guarantee bearing the name and signature “XY” purporting to
guarantee the due performance by PQ of his obligations under the said hire-purchase agreement (“the guarantee”).
Copies of those documents are served with this Claim Form.
3.
The schedule to the hire-purchase agreement contained the following statements about PQ:
 
(a)[summarise the relevant statements]
4.
The guarantee contained the statement that the guarantor was XY of [date].
5.
Acting in reliance on the representations set out in the said documents, on [date] the Claimant entered into an agreement in
writing with the Defendant (“the sale agreement”) whereby the Defendant sold the goods to the Claimant for the purpose
of letting it on hire-purchase to PQ. A copy of the sale agreement is annexed to this Claim Form.

Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
6.
It was an express condition of the sale agreement that the Defendant warranted that every statement in the schedule to the
hire-purchase agreement and in any guarantee thereof was true and accurate in every particular.
7.
Acting further in reliance on the statements in the said documents, on [date] entered into the hire-purchase agreement with
PQ by completing and executing the hire-purchase document and by such agreement the Claimant let the goods to PQ
on hire-purchase.
8.
The said statements were untrue:
 
(a)[give details of matters relied on]
9.
At some time unknown to the Claimant but before [date], PQ disappeared with the goods and the goods have never been
traced.
10.
Had the true facts been known to the Claimant it would never have entered into the said hire-purchase agreement.
11.
By reason of the said matters, the Defendant is in breach of the sale agreement and the Claimant has suffered loss and
damage thereby.
Particulars
(a)
Total hire-purchase price:
£[..........]
Less amounts paid by PQ:
£[..........]
(b)
Cost of attempting to trace PQ, XY and the
goods:
£[..........]
Total:
£[..........]
The Claimant therefore claims:
 
(1)Damages.
 
(2)Interest pursuant to s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
