Claim against bank for breach of its duty of care where..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim against bank for breach of its duty of care where the bank
is on notice of fraud
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 9 - Banking
Claim against bank for breach of its duty of care where the bank is on notice of fraud
1.
9-E5
The Defendant is a bank. The Claimant is a company. AB is the managing director of the Claimant.
2.
The Claimant holds an account (“the Account”) pursuant to a written mandate authorising the Defendant to pay the
Claimant’s cheques if signed by AB (“the Mandate”). A copy of the Mandate is attached to these Particulars of Claim
marked “A”.
3.
It was an implied term of the Mandate that the Defendant would exercise reasonable skill and care in the execution of the
Claimant’s orders, including cheques drawn on the Account.
4.
Between [dates], AB fraudulently caused the following payments to be made from the Account into his personal account
at the XY Bank (“the Payments”): [set out details of the relevant payments].
5.
The Defendant had reasonable grounds for believing that AB was operating the Account and/or causing the Payments to
be made fraudulently, and in continuing to make the Payments without inquiry the Defendant was negligent and in breach
of the implied term of the Mandate set out above. [Set out the particulars relied upon.]
6.
By reason of the matters set out above, the Claimant has suffered loss and damage [Set out particulars of loss.]
7.
Further, the Claimant is entitled to and claims interest on such sums at such rates and for such period as the Court shall
determine pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Damages;
 
(2)Interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981, to be assessed.

Claim against bank for breach of its duty of care where..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
