Defence alleging guarantee procured by misrepresentation, UKBC-BULLENL 459371088...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defence alleging guarantee procured by misrepresentation
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 13 - Guarantees
Defence alleging guarantee procured by misrepresentation
1.
13-E4
The Defendant is the wife of AB, the sole director of and shareholder in a company, G Limited (“the Company”). AB was
a customer of the [..........] branch of B Bank and the Company’s accounts were held at the same branch.
2.
It is admitted that on or about [date], the Defendant executed an unlimited guarantee (“the Guarantee”) of the liabilities of
G Limited to B Bank Plc. A copy of this Guarantee is attached to the Particulars of Claim in this action, marked “A”.
3.
On or about [date], and at Mr Z’s request, the Defendant attended the branch of B Bank without her husband, and met with
Mr Z. The execution of the Guarantee by the Defendant was procured by the misrepresentation of the Claimant’s agent, Mr
Z, who was the manager at the [..........] branch of B Bank, and with whom the Defendant dealt in relation to the Guarantee.
Particulars
[Set out in full detail, in short and simple sentences the particulars of the misrepresentation.]
 
(i)At this meeting, Mr Z asked the Defendant to sign some documentation which he stated would simply “renew
existing facilities” for AB’s company. The Defendant was at this time already a limited liability guarantor of the
liabilities of G Limited, up to a maximum of £50,000.
 
(ii)Mr Z also stated at this meeting, in answer to a specific query by the Defendant, that the limit of the overdraft of
G Limited was £100,000 and would not be increased by B Bank without specific reference to and consent from the
Defendant, as guarantor under the existing, limited guarantee.
4.
The representations of Mr Z were false in material respects.
Particulars of falsity
[Set out in full detail, in short and simple sentences the particulars of why the representations were false.]
 
(i)The guarantee documents which Mr Z asked the Defendant to sign were not in order to renew the existing guarantee
and facilities of G Limited, but included a new form of unlimited “all monies” guarantee (the Guarantee which the
Claimant now relies on) under which the Defendant’s guarantee liabilities for the debts of G Limited were indeed
unlimited.
 
(ii)The overdraft facilities granted to G Limited were not in fact limited to £100,000 but were extended such that on
[date of demand letter under Guarantee] the overdraft liabilities were £350,000.

Defence alleging guarantee procured by misrepresentation, UKBC-BULLENL 459371088...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(iii)The Bank was not obliged to, and did not in fact at any time, refer to the Defendant or obtain her consent before
extending the overdraft facilities of G Limited beyond £100,000.
5.
The Defendant was induced to execute the Guarantee by the misrepresentations of the Claimant, as set out above.
6.
In these circumstances, the Defendant is entitled to and does claim rescission of the Guarantee.
AND the Defendant claims:
 
(1)A declaration that the Guarantee ought to be rescinded/set aside as having been procured by the misrepresentations
of the Claimant;
 
(2)An order that the Bank do deliver up the Guarantee to be cancelled forthwith.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
