“Doorstep selling”, UKBC-BULLENL 459371748 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
“Doorstep selling”
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
“Doorstep selling”
20-15
The Cancellation of Contracts made in a Consumer’s Home or Place of Work etc Regulations 2008 (SI 2008/1816) (note the “etc”
forms part of the official title) which came into force on 1 October 2008 made a whole range of contracts concluded away from
business premises cancellable by the consumer. There are exceptions (listed in Sch.3 to the Regulations). The provisions of these
regulations were re-enacted in the 2013 Regulations (SI 2013/3134) which added requirements for pre-contract information
in the case of ‘on-premises’ contracts as well. “Off-premises” contracts must contain prescribed formulae and a cancellation
notice and are unenforceable by the seller if they do not, though they remain enforceable by the consumer. The consumer may
cancel the contract by serving a written notice of cancellation on the trader, or on any other person specified in the notice of
cancellation rights as a person to whom notice of cancellation may be given, within the period of seven days following the
making of the contract. Except as otherwise provided, a cancelled contract is to be treated as if it had never been entered into
by the consumer. Any sum paid under or in contemplation of the contract is repayable and if the consumer or any other person
on his behalf is in possession of any goods he is given a lien on them to secure repayment. Security provided in relation to
the contract is to be treated as never having had effect, and any property lodged with the trader solely for the purposes of that
security is to be returned by him forthwith. Notwithstanding the cancellation of a contract under which credit is provided, the
contract remains in force so far as it relates to repayment of credit and payment of interest. Cancellation of any contract for
goods or services has the effect of automatically cancelling any related credit agreement and where the credit agreement is
a regulated agreement, it is treated as if it had been cancelled under the cancellation provisions of the CCA 1974 and those
provisions will apply (notwithstanding that the agreement may not itself have been cancellable under the CCA).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
