To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: making of the contract
Defences arising out of the failure of the agreement of the lender or owner to disclose information
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
Version 1: to be used for agreements made before 1 February 2011 and for agreements to which the Consumer Credit
(Disclosure of Information) Regulations 2010 do not apply
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
20-F52
The Defendant denies that the document referred to in the Particulars of Claim constitutes a valid agreement enforceable
by the Claimant.
2.
The document purports to be an agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and thus governed
by the Consumer Credit (Agreements) Regulations 1983 (“the Regulations”).
3.
In breach of the Consumer Credit (Disclosure of Information) Regulations 2004 (“the Regulations”), the Claimant failed
to disclosure the information required by the Regulations before entering into the agreement.
Particulars
 
(a)Contrary to Reg.3 of the Regulations the Claimant failed to disclose any of the information or statements of
protection and remedies required by that regulation;
 
(b)Contrary to Reg.3(1) of the Regulations the Claimant failed to disclose the information or statements of protection
required to be given under Reg.2 of the Consumer Credit (Agreements) Regulations 1983 in that the information
given failed to comply with the said Reg.2 in the following particulars
 
(i)[set out the like particulars to those in Form 20–E52]
 
(ii)…
 
(c)Contrary to Reg.4 of the Regulations, the information and statements of protection and remedies
 
(i)were not easily legible

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(ii)were interspersed with other information and wording [give details]
 
(iii)were not contained in a document separate from the agreement
 
(iv)were not headed “Pre-contract information”
 
(v)were not on paper or other durable medium or able to be removed from the place where they were disclosed
to the Defendant
4.
Consequently under s.55(2) of the CCA, the agreement itself was not properly executed and is unenforceable under s.65
of the CCA.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
