Defence in a separate document, UKBC-BULLENL 459372197 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defence in a separate document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Buyer’s Defences
Denial of sufficiency of documents under a C.I.F. contract and denial of delivery F.O.B.
Defence in a separate document
1.
25-F59
The Defendant admits that it entered into the written contract with the Claimant annexed to the Claim Form whereby the
Claimant agreed to sell to the Defendant the goods referred to in the Particulars of Claim.
2.
The said goods were sold c.i.f. and the contract provided for the price to be payable upon tender to the Defendant of:
 
(a)an invoice relating to the goods;
 
(b)a certificate of origin relating to the goods;
 
(c)a bill of lading covering the shipping of the goods from Lisbon to Tilbury;
 
(d)a policy of insurance covering the voyage.
3.
The Defendant denies that the Claimant tendered the documents in proper form.
Particulars
 
(a)The invoice tendered did not relate to the goods sold [details] (copy annexed to this Defence).
 
(b)The Claimant failed to tender any certificate of origin.
 
(c)The bill of lading tendered was a draft bill and was not signed by the master or owners of the vessel (copy annexed
to this Defence).
 
(d)The Claimant tendered a policy of insurance which had expired before the voyage commenced (copy annexed to
this Defence).
Or
2.
It was an express term of the contract that the goods were sold f.o.b. to be shipped on the vessel “Jacob II” at Tilbury.

Defence in a separate document, UKBC-BULLENL 459372197 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
3.
The Claimant failed to deliver the goods or any part thereof on board the said or any vessel at Tilbury and the goods remain
at the Claimant’s factory.
4.
In the premises, the Claimant is not entitled to payment of the purchase price or any part thereof.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
