Causation and loss, UKBC-BULLENL 459373409 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Causation and loss
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 2
Part Y - Professional Negligence
Chapter 85 - Professional Negligence
Causation and loss
85-08
The burden is on the claimant to show that the breaches of duty alleged caused the losses complained of. Causation is often not
straightforward in professional negligence cases and the courts are wary of claims which seek to make the defendant’s insurers
liable for all the problems which have befallen the claimant. For example, in Galoo Ltd v Bright Grahame Murray 22  the Court
of Appeal differentiated between a breach which caused the loss, and one which merely provided the occasion or opportunity
for the subsequent suffering of the loss. Thus the mere fact that a negligent audit of a company’s account which showed profits
when they should have showed losses had the effect of enabling the company to remain trading (i.e. “but for” the negligence
it would have stopped trading) does not mean that the auditors were liable for all the losses consequent upon that continued
trading. Rather there had to be a specific and substantial link between the breach and the loss alleged. Although in the context
of an accountant’s failure to discover fraud, see Sasea Finance Ltd v KPMG. 23
The courts are equally concerned to impose limits on the type and extent of losses which can be claimed. In Banque Bruxelles
Lambert SA v Eagle Star Insurance Co Ltd 24  the important point was made that the kind of loss recoverable depends on the
nature and scope of the duty alleged. The professional who gives advice as to which course of action to take may fairly be held
responsible for all losses which flow from the taking of that course (subject, of course, to foreseeability). On the other hand, the
professional who provides information which will then form part of a larger decision-making process undertaken by the claimant
(e.g. the provision of a valuation to a bank) should not be held liable for all the losses flowing from the action taken in reliance
upon that information (among other things). Thus the bank which decides to lend on security valued by a negligent valuer cannot
claim from the valuer the losses arising from the diminution in value to the property due to a fall in the market, for such a loss
is unconnected to the particular duty undertaken. See also Gabriel v Little, 25  where the Supreme Court confirmed that in an
“information” case, the advisor is only liable for the financial consequences of the information itself being wrong, even if the
client would, with the correct information, have refused to enter into the transaction or course of conduct giving rise to the loss.
Where the alleged negligence leads to the claimant losing the opportunity to pursue a particular course of action, damages may
be awarded on a “loss of a chance” basis. In such a case, (i) the claimant must prove on the balance of probabilities what they
would have done, but (ii) the actions of third parties or other fortuities are assessed on the basis of the likelihood of the desired
result occurring. 26  One example of these claims is where a lawyer is sued for negligence for failing to issue proceedings on
time or allowing them to be struck out, damages are to be valued on the basis of a loss of a chance of success in the “lost” action.
A defendant to such a claim may wish to identify particular contingencies which he relies upon as making that chance of little
value and may do this by cross-referring in his defence to the issues raised in the defence in the underlying action. 27
It should be remembered that claimable losses may include wasted expenditure (often useful as an alternative to damages based
on what would have happened in the absence of negligence which might be highly speculative) and also the costs of reasonable
mitigation undertaken by the claimant even if unsuccessful. Damages may also include the fees paid to the professional, if their
services have been rendered valueless by the breach. 28
Applications to strike out or seek dismissal of a claim as having no real prospect of success are not infrequently made on behalf
of defendants whose case on liability may be weak. Accordingly, it is necessary that the claimant’s case on loss is analysed and
then structured carefully prior to it being set out in the statement of case.

Causation and loss, UKBC-BULLENL 459373409 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
22
Galoo Ltd v Bright Grahame Murray [1994] 1 W.L.R. 1360.
23
Sasea Finance Ltd v KPMG [2000] 1 All E.R. 676, CA.
24
Banque Bruxelles Lambert SA v Eagle Star Insurance Co Ltd [1997] A.C. 191.
25
Gabriel v Little [2017] UKSC 21; [2018] A.C. 599.
26
Perry v Raleys Solicitors [2019] UKSC 5; [2019] 2 W.L.R. 636.
27
See the approach taken by Neuberger J in Harrison v Bloom Camillin (No.2) [2000] Lloyd’s Rep. P.N. 404, where
separate discounts were calculated for liability and causation and for a counterclaim and see the same judge’s comments
at an earlier stage in the same case (Harrison v Bloom Camillin [2000] Lloyd’s Rep. P.N. 89) to the effect that, in relation
to points of law, the court should be more ready to determine whether a claimant would have succeeded or failed.
28
Heywood v Wellers [1976] Q.B. 446.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
