To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 21 - Commission Agents
Defences of the Principal
Defence that the claimant had repudiated the contract by accepting a secret profit
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a separate document
Defence and Counterclaim
1.
21-F15
It is admitted that by a written agreement made on the [date] the Defendant/Part 20 Claimant (“CD”) appointed the Claimant
as his agent for purchases of investment properties.
2.
In performing the agency agreement, the Claimant was required to select such property as was most suitable for the needs
of CD. The Claimant as an agent undertaking to act for CD in circumstances giving rise to a relationship of trust and
confidence owed him a fiduciary duty to prefer his principal’s interests to those of his own.
3.
Pursuant to the agency agreement, the Claimant introduced CD to GH Limited, the registered proprietor of [identify the
property].
4.
Unknown to CD, GH Limited had agreed with the Claimant to pay him commission at the rate of x% on a sale of the
property.
5.

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
CD has paid GH Limited the purchase price of £[..........]. At the rate of x%, the Claimant will have received commission
of £[..........].
6.
The commission so agreed was a secret profit and was paid to the Claimant in breach of the fiduciary duty he owed CD.
7.
In agreeing to accept and in accepting a secret profit, the Claimant repudiated the agency agreement which repudiation CD
has accepted. Alternatively, CD became entitled to rescind the agency agreement and has done so.
8.
In the premises, the Claimant is disentitled from pursuing his claim for commission.
Counterclaim
9.
CD repeats his Defence.
10.
The Claimant is liable to account to CD for all sums paid to him by GH Limited by way of commission or otherwise.
11.
Further, the Claimant has suffered loss and damage and/or the commission so paid is money had and received by the
Claimant to CD’s use and CD seeks restitution.
12.
CD is entitled pursuant to [s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984] [s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981] on such sums found
due at such rate and for such period as the Court sees fit.
CD therefore counterclaims:
 
(1)An account of all sums received by the Claimant from GH Limited.
 
(2)An order for payment to CD of all sums found to have been so paid upon the taking of the account and/or damages
for breach of contract.
 
(3)Interest pursuant to [s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984] [s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981].
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9B]

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
