To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 24 - Set-off
Defence alleging a set-off against the rent and counterclaim
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a separate document
Defence and counterclaim
1.
24-F2
Subject to the set-off hereinafter pleaded, the Defendant admits rent due in the sum claimed in paragraph 3 of the Particulars
of Claim.
2.
Under s.11(1)(b) of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1985, the Defendant’s tenancy was subject to the implied covenant by
the Claimant to keep in repair and proper working order the installations in the dwelling-house for the supply of water.
3.
The Defendant notified the Claimant of [identify defect giving rise to breach of covenant] on [date] but the Claimant
neglected to repair the same. On [date] [set out consequences of breach of covenant, with details of damage caused].
4.
The Claimant’s failure to effect a repair within a reasonable time when notified of the defect was a breach of its covenant
to repair.
5.
By reason of the Claimant’s breach, the Defendant has suffered loss and damage.
Particulars of Loss and Damage
 
(a)[give details of each item of loss]

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
6.
Further, the Defendant and his family suffered inconvenience and distress.
7.
The Defendant is entitled to set-off his claim in damages against the rent due.
8.
If the Defendant is not entitled to the set-off as set out above, he will seek to counterclaim damages as hereinafter appears
in diminution or extinction of the Claimant’s claim.
Counterclaim
9.
The Defendant repeats paragraphs 2 to 6 of his Defence.
10.
The Claimant seeks interest on all sums found due at such rate as the Court deems just pursuant to s.69 of the County
Courts Act 1984.
The Defendant therefore counterclaims:
 
(1)Damages.
 
(2)Interest under [s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984] [s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981].
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9B]
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
