Claim for damages for negligence against a solicitor in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for damages for negligence against a solicitor in relation to
a personal injury action
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 2
Part Y - Professional Negligence
Chapter 85 - Professional Negligence
Claim for damages for negligence against a solicitor in relation to a personal injury action
1.
85-Y6
The Defendants are and were at all material times a firm of solicitors practising from [address]. The Claimant is a model.
2.
On or about [date] the Claimant suffered a broken arm, broken left cheekbone, cuts to her face and extensive bruising
when the car in which she was a passenger was involved in a collision with another vehicle driven by A. That accident was
caused by the negligence of A. Particulars of that negligence and of the Claimant’s personal injuries and loss and damage
are set out in the Claimant’s Claim Form and Particulars of Claim in action [claim number] a copy of which is annexed.
3.
On or about [date] the Claimant consulted B, who was at the material time a solicitor employed by the Defendants, at their
offices. B advised the Claimant that she had a reasonable chance of success in a claim against A for personal injury caused
by A’s negligence and that she was likely to recover damages which would include her continuing loss of earnings as a
model, as a result of the scarring to her face. Accordingly, the Claimant instructed B to act for her in connection with the
said claim against A, which B, acting on behalf of the Defendants, agreed to do. The said retainer is evidenced by a letter
dated [date] from the Defendants to the Claimant.
4.
There were implied terms of the aforesaid retainer as follows:
 
(a)that the Defendants would carry out the Claimant’s instructions with reasonable diligence; and
 
(b)that the Defendants would exercise reasonable skill and care in the performance of their duties pursuant to the
said retainer.
5.
Further, or in the alternative, the Defendants owed the Claimant a duty of care in tort to the like effect.
6.
On [date] B sent a letter of claim to A, pursuant to the pre-action protocol for personal injury claims. On [date] B telephoned
the Claimant and informed her that he had been contacted by solicitors instructed on behalf of A and that he was chasing
them for a substantive response to the letter of claim.

Claim for damages for negligence against a solicitor in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
7.
The Claimant heard nothing more from the Defendants until some 18 months later, on or about [date], when B telephoned
the Claimant and advised her that proceedings needed to be commenced against A by no later than [date] and that a medical
expert should be instructed to prepare a report and a barrister should be instructed to settle the Particulars of Claim. The
Claimant agreed to this.
8.
In fact, although B stated in the course of the said telephone advice that the latest date for commencing proceedings was
[date] this was erroneous. Pursuant to s.11 of the Limitation Act 1980, the primary limitation period for the Claimant’s
claim against A in fact expired on [date].
9.
B did not instruct a medical expert until [date] and did not instruct a barrister to draft the Particulars of Claim until [date].
Proceedings were not instituted by the Defendants until [date], after expiry of the primary limitation period, when the
Claim Form in action [claim number] was issued and, together with the Particulars of Claim, served on A’s solicitors (“the
original action”).
10.
By application notice dated [date] A applied to strike out the original action on the grounds that the same was statute barred.
In an attempt to mitigate her losses, the Claimant instructed new solicitors and Counsel to resist that application. The Court
refused to exercise its discretion under s.33 of the Limitation Act 1980 to disapply s.11 and struck out the original action,
awarding A his costs, to be subject to detailed assessment if not agreed.
11.
In breach of the implied terms pleaded in paragraph 4 hereof and/or negligently, the Defendants have failed to carry out
the Claimant’s instructions with reasonable diligence or to exercise reasonable skill and care in the performance of their
duties pursuant to the said retainer.
Particulars of Negligence
 
(a)failing to progress the claim with reasonable diligence, in particular, failing to progress it within a reasonable time
after the date of the letter of claim;
 
(b)failing to advise the Claimant at any time before [date] that steps should be taken to institute proceedings and/or
that a medical expert and/or barrister should be instructed for that purpose and/or as to the risk that her claim might
become time-barred;
 
(c)erroneously advising the Claimant that she had until [date] to institute proceedings, when B ought to have
appreciated that the limitation period under s.11 of the Limitation Act 1980 would in fact expire on [date] and ought
to have advised the Claimant accordingly;
 
(d)failing to instruct a medical expert at any time before [date];
 
(e)failing to instruct a barrister to settle proceedings at any time before [date] and then doing so on the erroneous basis
that the limitation period would expire on [date];
 
(f)failing to issue proceedings against A within the primary limitation period;
 
(g)thereby causing or permitting the Claimant’s claim against A to become time-barred.
12.
By reason of the matters aforesaid the Claimant has suffered loss and damage for which the Defendants are liable.
Particulars of Loss and Damage

Claim for damages for negligence against a solicitor in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
(a)The Claimant has lost the opportunity of recovering damages from A, which she had a reasonable prospect of
recovering. The said damages, full particulars of which appear from the Particulars of Claim in the original action,
attached hereto, would in summary have comprised:
 
(i)damages for pain suffering and loss of amenity;
 
(ii)items of special damage including past and future loss of earnings, as set out in schedule A to the said
Particulars of Claim; and/or
 
(b)The sum which the Claimant has paid the Defendants on account of their costs, namely £[..........], which was wholly
wasted as a result of the Defendants’ negligence and/or for which the consideration has wholly failed.
 
(c)The costs which the Claimant was ordered to pay A, which were agreed between A’s solicitors and the Claimant’s
new solicitors, Messrs X, in the sum of £[..........].
 
(d)The costs which the Claimant incurred in mitigating her damage, namely the costs of £[..........], including Counsel’s
fees, incurred in seeking advice from new solicitors and Counsel in relation to the strike out application and in resisting
that application.
13.
Further, the Claimant is entitled to and claims interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 on any sum which
may be awarded herein for such period and at such rate as the Court shall think fit.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Damages.
 
(2)Interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 as aforesaid.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
