To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: making of the contract
Defence under s.65 of the CCA and the Regulations
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
20-F57
The Defendant denies that the document referred to in the Particulars of Claim constitutes a valid agreement enforceable
by the Claimant.
2.
The document purports to be an agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and thus governed
by the Consumer Credit (Cancellation Notices and Copies of Documents) Regulations 1983 (“the Regulations”).
3.
The purported agreement was a cancellable agreement within the meaning of s.67 of the CCA.
4.
The agreement was improperly executed in that:
 
(a)Contrary to s.64(1) and regulation 5(1) of the Regulations, the copy of the cancellable unexecuted agreement sent
to the Defendant did not include a notice indicating the right of the Defendant to cancel the agreement alternatively
included a notice which was not in the form prescribed in Part II of the Schedule to the Regulations.
 
(b)Contrary to s.64(1) of the CCA and regulation 5(2) of the Regulations, a copy of the cancellable executed agreement
sent to the Defendant did not include a notice indicating the right of the Defendant to cancel the agreement alternatively
a notice which complied with the wording prescribed by Part III of the Schedule to the Regulations.
 
(c)Contrary to s.64(1) of the CCA and regulation 5(2) of the Regulations, the copy of the cancellable executed
agreement sent to the Defendant did not include a cancellation form alternatively included a cancellation form which
was not in the form specified in Part IV of the Schedule to the Regulations.
 
(d)Contrary to s.64(1) and regulation 5(3) of the Regulations, there being no notice indicating the right of the
Defendant to cancel the agreement on the first page of the copy delivered to the Defendant, the copy failed to include
on its first page a box containing the statement in the form specified in Part V of the Schedule to the Regulations.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
5.
In the premises, the agreement is not enforceable by the Claimant and [the Claimant is not entitled to an enforcement
order under s.65(1) of the CCA by reason of s.127(4)(b) of the CCA] [the Defendant will object to an enforcement order
being made].
[Statement of truth]
Note
 
1.In paragraph 5, where the agreement was made before 6 April 2007, the first of the words in square brackets should be
used: where it was made on or after that date the second set of words in brackets must be used].
 
2.After 1 February 2011, the only categories of agreement subject to the cancellation provisions of the CCA are consumer
hire agreements and consumer credit agreements for credit above £60,260.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
