Defence alleging non-performance of obligations by the..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defence alleging non-performance of obligations by the claimant
(including breach of incorporated implied term/condition) and
setting up defence open to principal debtor
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 13 - Guarantees
Defence alleging non-performance of obligations by the claimant (including breach of incorporated implied term/
condition) and setting up defence open to principal debtor
1.
13-E3
The Defendant admits that he executed the guarantee dated [date] (“the guarantee”) which is annexed to the Claim Form
and by which he guaranteed the liabilities of XY to the Claimant under the sale agreement as set out in the Particulars
of Claim (“the sale agreement”).
2.
The Defendant admits that by letter dated [date] annexed to the Claim Form, the Claimant, pursuant to the guarantee,
demanded payment by the Defendant of the sum of £10,000 which the Claimant alleged was the balance outstanding and
due to the Claimant from XY under the sale agreement. 45
3.
The sale agreement provided that the Claimant would sell to XY a consignment of fridges. It was necessarily an implied
condition of the sale agreement that the fridges should be of satisfactory quality, and reasonably fit for the purpose for which
they were required by PQ, namely for selling to the public in the course of business as a retailer of domestic electrical goods.
4.
In breach of the condition of the sale agreement, the fridges were not of satisfactory quality nor were they fit for the said
purpose in that, in 80 per cent of cases sampled, the internal wiring was seriously defective and it was unsafe to use them.
5.
By reason of the breach of the sale agreement, PQ suffered loss and damage in the sum of £12,000 being the cost to PQ
of having the wiring repaired in the fridges that were found to be defective.
6.
The Defendant is entitled to and does claim to set off the £12,000 repair costs against the £10,000 alleged to be due from
XY to the Claimant under the sale agreement so as to extinguish that balance.
7.
For the reasons set out above, the Defendant denies that any sum is owed by XY to the Claimant as at the date of the
demand letter. Accordingly, the Defendant denies that it is liable to the Claimant for the sum claimed or for any sum.

Defence alleging non-performance of obligations by the..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
45
Insert the figure relevant to the specific case, here and where subsequent amounts are indicated.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
