Credit-tokens, UKBC-BULLENL 459371680 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Credit-tokens
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Credit-tokens
20-11
A credit-token is an object (normally a plastic card) which entitles the holder to obtain cash or purchase goods or services on
terms whereby the provider of the card gives credit to the holder for these purposes. As most credit-tokens are provided under
agreements regulated by the CCA, the definition in s.14(1) of the CCA is important:
“A credit-token is a card, check [sic], voucher, coupon, stamp, form, booklet or other document or thing given to
an individual by a person carrying on a consumer credit business, who undertakes:
 
(a)that on the production of it (whether or not some other action is also required) he will supply cash, goods
and services (or any of them) on credit, or
 
(b)that where, on the production of it to a third party (whether or not any other action is also required), the
third party supplies cash, goods and services (or any of them), he will pay the third party for them (whether
or not deducting any discount or commission), in return for payment to him by the individual.”
The essential feature is the giving of credit. The holder is sent a periodical statement and is given the choice of paying the
entire sum due or leaving all or part of the balance outstanding, to be repaid (usually with interest). There is thus a right to
postpone payment. If there is no right to postpone and the whole amount due must be paid, the card is not a credit-token. Thus
a credit-card is a credit-token but a charge-card or debit card is not. Similarly a cheque book, a cheque guarantee card and a
“Switch” card are not credit-tokens.
The nature of the contracts set up by the use of a credit-token must be carefully analysed in each case.
 
1.Where the credit-token is used to draw money from the creditor, the contract is one of loan.
 
2.Where the credit-token is used to obtain goods and services from the creditor, there are two contracts:
 
(a)a contract for the supply of goods or services;
 
(b)a contract of loan.
 
3.Where the credit-token is used to obtain goods and services from a supplier other than the creditor, there are at least
three contracts 6 :
 
(a)a master agreement between the creditor and supplier whereby the supplier agrees to accept the credit-token in
payment;
 
(b)a master agreement between the creditor and the debtor whereby the creditor authorises the debtor to use the credit-
token to obtain goods and services and grants him credit to do so;
 
(c)a supply contract between the supplier and the debtor.
(There may be a fourth contract between the creditor and a credit-token service such as Visa whereby the service arranges for
the supplier to accept the creditor’s credit-token as payment for goods and services).

Credit-tokens, UKBC-BULLENL 459371680 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
The CCA buttresses this system by giving the debtor a right to pursue the supplier’s breaches of the supply contract against the
creditor. The CCA classifies credit-token agreements as “running account credit”. It should be noted that the CCA regulates
credit-token agreements even when the credit token is used to purchase goods and services outside the UK. 7
Footnotes
6
Re Charge Card Services Ltd [1989] Ch. 497.
7
Office of Fair Trading v Lloyds TSB BankPlc [2007] UKHL 48; [2008] 1 A.C. 316.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
