Claim for an injunction to restrain payment on a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for an injunction to restrain payment on a performance
bond
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 11 - Bonds
Claim for an injunction to restrain payment on a performance bond
1.
11-E5
The Defendant is a bank. The Claimant holds the following accounts at this branch: [set out details].
2.
By a contract in writing dated [date], the Claimant agreed to sell and XY agreed to buy quantities of wheat (“the Contract
of Sale”). The Contract of Sale is attached to these Particulars of Claim marked “A”.
3.
It was a condition of the Contract of Sale that a performance bond in the amount of 30 per cent of the total contract price
was opened in favour of XY (“the Performance Bond”) prior to a letter of credit being opened for the payment of the
agreed price. The Performance Bond was duly issued by the Defendant at the Claimant’s request. The Performance Bond
is attached to these Particulars of Claim marked “B”.
4.
By a fax dated [date], the Claimant gave a counter-indemnity to the Defendant in respect of the Performance Bond. The
counter-indemnity contained the following implied terms:
 
(i)The Defendant would not pay any sums under the Performance Bond pursuant to an invalid demand made on it
by XY.
 
(ii)The Defendant would not pay out any sum under the Performance Bond in the event of fraud.
 
(iii)In the circumstances referred to in (i) and/or (ii) above, the Defendant would not debit any account of the Claimant
with the amount of any payment or payments made by it under the Performance Bond.
5.
By a fax dated [date], XY purported to make a demand on the Defendant for the full amount of the Performance Bond
(“the Demand”).
6.
In fact, the Demand was invalid in that [set out particulars of the manner in which the demand did not conform with the
terms of the Performance Bond].

Claim for an injunction to restrain payment on a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
7.
Further or alternatively, the Demand was fraudulent in that XY presented a claim which it knew at the time to be an invalid
claim, representing to the Defendant that it believed the claim to be valid. [Set out particulars of the fraud.]
8.
The Defendant was and is aware of the fraud. Further or alternatively, the circumstances are such that the only realistic or
reasonable inference is that the Demand was fraudulent. Accordingly, there is an established fraud.
9.
For the reasons set out above, the Defendant is not liable to make any payment under the Performance Bond and the
Claimant is not liable to the Defendant for any sums which the Defendant might elect to pay to XY pursuant to the Demand,
and the Defendant is not entitled to debit any of the Claimant’s accounts with any such sums.
10.
In breach of the implied terms set out above, by a letter dated [date] the Defendant has threatened and continues to threaten
to pay the Demand and debit the Claimant’s accounts, and will do so unless prohibited by the Court.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)An injunction to prohibit the Defendant from paying any sum pursuant to the Demand or any demands purportedly
made pursuant to the Performance Bond;
 
(2)A declaration that the Defendant is not entitled to debit the Claimant’s accounts or any of them with any sum in
payment of the Demand and that the Claimant is not liable to the Defendant for any sum or sums which the Defendant
may elect to pay to XY pursuant to the Demand or any demands purportedly made pursuant to the Performance Bond;
 
(3)An order that the Defendant reimburse the Claimant the full amount of any sums debited pursuant to the terms of
the Performance Bond together with interest on such sums at such rate and for such period as the Court shall determine
to be assessed pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
