Claim for damages for negligence against an insurance broker, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for damages for negligence against an insurance broker
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 2
Part Y - Professional Negligence
Chapter 85 - Professional Negligence
Claim for damages for negligence against an insurance broker
1.
85-Y4
At all material times:
 
(a)the Claimant carried on the business of the operation and management of [name and address] (“the Hotel”); and
 
(b)the Defendant carried on the business of insurance broking at [address].
2.
By a letter dated [date] Claimant instructed the Defendant to procure for the Claimant a policy of fire and theft insurance
in respect of the Hotel for a period of 12 months from [date] (“the Period”) and by a letter dated [date] the Defendant
confirmed to the Claimant that it had instructed underwriters to procure a policy of fire and theft insurance for the Period
and that a cover note would be forwarded to the Claimant in respect of the same in the near future.
3.
The contract between the Claimant and the Defendant evidenced by the letters pleaded in paragraph 2 above contained
the following express, alternatively implied, terms:
 
(a)that in return for the payment of a premium by the Claimant to the Defendant the Defendant would procure a valid
policy of fire and theft insurance in respect of the Hotel for the Period;
 
(b)that in the event that the Defendant was unable to effect fire and theft insurance in respect of the Hotel for the Period
on the terms required by the Claimant or at all the Defendant would promptly notify the Claimant of the same; and
 
(c)that the Defendant would exercise reasonable care and skill throughout.
4.
Further, or in the alternative, the Defendant was under a duty of care to the Claimant in like terms to the contractual duties
pleaded in paragraph 3 above.
5.
On [date] the Claimant paid to the Defendant the sum of £[..........], such sum representing the premium (“the Premium”)
in respect of the policy of fire and theft insurance that the Defendant had purported to effect in respect of the Hotel for
the Period.

Claim for damages for negligence against an insurance broker, UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
6.
On [date] the Hotel was badly damaged by fire. On [date] the Claimant informed the Defendant of the same and on that
date the Claimant notified the Defendant that it wished to make a claim under the policy of fire and theft insurance in
respect of the loss and damage resulting from the said fire.
7.
At all times since the said notification of the claim to the Defendant the Claimant has been informed that the Hotel was
not covered by a valid policy of fire insurance for the Period but was only covered by a valid policy of theft insurance
and the Claimant is accordingly unable to recover thereunder indemnity for the loss and damage that it has suffered as a
result of the said fire at the Hotel.
8.
In the premises, the Defendant is in breach of contract and/or duty of care as follows.
Particulars of Negligence
 
(a)In consideration of the payment of the Premium by the Claimant to the Defendant the Defendant failed to procure
a valid policy of fire insurance in respect of the Hotel for the Period; and
 
(b)at all material times the Defendant failed to notify the Claimant promptly or at all that the Defendant had failed to
procure a valid policy of fire insurance in respect of the Hotel for the Period and the Claimant was thereby prevented
from itself procuring a policy of fire insurance in respect of the Hotel for the Period.
9.
In the premises, as a result of the matters aforesaid the Claimant has suffered loss and damage.
Particulars of Loss and Damage
[Set out loss and damage suffered.]
10.
Further, the Claimant claims interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 on the amount found to be due to
the Claimant at such rate and for such period as the Court thinks fit.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Damages as aforesaid.
 
(2)Interest thereon pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
