Particulars of claim to be attached in Claim Form N1 or..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Particulars of claim to be attached in Claim Form N1 or served
subsequently
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 21 - Commission Agents
Claim by Principals against Agents
Claim by principal based on receipt of secret profits, etc
Particulars of claim to be attached in Claim Form N1 or served subsequently
1.
21-F9
The Claimant is an hotelier.
2.
By a written agreement made on the [date] the Claimant appointed the Defendant as its agent for purchases of [identify the
goods]. A copy of the agency agreement is annexed to this Claim Form.
3.
Pursuant to the agreement, the Defendant acted as a self-employed agent with continuing authority to negotiate and
conclude purchases in the name of the Claimant. The Defendant was thereby a commercial agent within the meaning of the
Commercial Agents (Council Directive) Regulations 1993, (“the Regulations”). The relationship between the Claimant
and the Defendant was governed by the Regulations.
4.
By regulation 4, a duty was imposed upon the Defendant to act dutifully and in good faith towards the Claimant.
5.
In performing the agency agreement, the Defendant was required to select goods that were the most suitable for the needs of
the Claimant. The Defendant as an agent undertaking to act for the Claimant in circumstances giving rise to a relationship
of trust and confidence owed him a fiduciary duty to prefer his principal’s interests to those of his own. The duty included
a duty of loyalty and to act in good faith and not to make a profit out of his trust, nor place himself in a position where his
duty and his interest conflicted, nor to act for his own benefit or for that of a third person without the informed consent
of his principal.
6.
By a series of contracts made between the Defendant on behalf of the Claimant and PQ Limited, the Defendant purchased
quantities of [identify goods] for use in the Claimant’s hotels.

Particulars of claim to be attached in Claim Form N1 or..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
7.
Unknown to the Claimant, PQ Limited had agreed with the Defendant to pay him commission at the rate of x% on such
sales as the Defendant negotiated with it pursuant to the agency agreement.
8.
The Claimant has paid PQ Limited sums totalling £[..........] for the supply of furnishing materials. At the rate of x%, the
Defendant will have received £[..........].
9.
The commission so agreed was a secret profit and was paid to the Defendant in breach of the fiduciary duty he owed
the Claimant.
10.
The commission was also paid in breach of the Defendant’s duty of good faith owed pursuant to regulation 4.
11.
The Defendant is therefore liable to account to the Claimant for all sums paid to him by PQ Limited by way of commission
or otherwise.
12.
Further, the Claimant has suffered loss and damage and/or the commission so paid is money had and received by the
Defendant to the Claimant’s use and the Claimant seeks restitution.
13.
The Claimant is entitled to interest pursuant to [s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984] [s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981]
on such forms found due at such rate and for such period as the Court sees fit.
The Claimant therefore claims:
 
(1)An account of all sums received from PQ.
 
(2)An order for payment to the Claimant of all sums found to have paid upon the taking of the account and/or damages
for breach of contract.
 
(3)Interest pursuant to [s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984] [s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981].
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
