Claim against bank for wrongful dishonour of a payment..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim against bank for wrongful dishonour of a payment
instruction
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 9 - Banking
Claim against bank for wrongful dishonour of a payment instruction
1.
9-E9
The Defendant is a bank.
2.
The Claimant carries on business as [specify trade].
3.
The Claimant holds an account at the Defendant (“the Account”), which he operates for the purposes of and in connection
with his trade.
4.
The Defendant is aware that the Claimant carries on this business and operates the Account in relation to it: [specify
particulars of knowledge].
5.
On [date] the Claimant drew a cheque upon the Account for £[..........] payable to AB (“the Cheque”) [in payment of a
trade debt due to AB].
6.
On that day and afterwards, the Claimant’s account was in credit in excess of the amount of the Cheque.
7.
On or about [date], the Cheque was duly presented for payment to the Defendant through the XY Bank.
8.
Wrongfully, in breach of contract and in breach of the Defendant’s duty to the Claimant as banker, the Defendant:
 
(1)failed to honour the Cheque;
 
(2)did not pay the amount of the Cheque out of the balance of the Account;
 
(3)marked the Cheque “Refer to drawer” and returned the Cheque to AB.

Claim against bank for wrongful dishonour of a payment..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
9.
Further or alternatively, the Defendant falsely and maliciously wrote on the Cheque the words “Refer to drawer” concerning
the Claimant, and published these words to AB and to the XY Bank.
10.
By these words, the Defendant meant and was understood to mean that the Claimant did not have sufficient funds standing
to the credit of the Account to meet the Cheque [and/or that the Claimant’s financial standing was unsound]. [Set out the
facts relied upon to support the innuendo.]
11.
By reason of the matters set out above, the Claimant has [lost the custom of AB and has] been injured in his credit and in
his trade, and has suffered loss and damage. [Set out particulars of loss.]
12.
Further, the Claimant is entitled to and claims interest on such sums at such rate and for such period as the Court shall
determine pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Damages for breach of contract;
 
(2)Damages for libel;
 
(3)Interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981, to be assessed.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
