Procedure, UKBC-BULLENL 459371687 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Procedure
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Procedure
20-35
Procedure was always tricky before the Civil Procedure Rules came into force. When the CPR first took effect, the procedure
for credit and leasing cases was a hopeless mess, with contradictory provisions between the various parts of the CPR itself
and the preservation of a whole set of provisions from the old County Court Rules which were inconsistent with any of the
provisions in the CPR. Though the problems have now been sorted out, the procedure still remains difficult and complex.
Some CCA claims have a special procedure “the Consumer Credit Act Procedure” with its own practice direction. This “is
found in PD7B” the main practice direction being 7A.
Which court?
20-36
Jurisdiction primarily depends on whether the agreement sued upon is regulated by the CCA:
 
1.If the agreement is unregulated, the action can be started in either the High Court or the county court, in accordance with
the rules governing other actions (CPR Pt 7 PD7A.2).
 
2.An action by a creditor or owner to enforce a regulated agreement or any security relating to it or to enforce any “linked
transaction” must be brought in the County Court: s.141(1).
 
3.Although this is not spelt out in terms, cases to which the “Consumer Credit Act Procedure” apply (see para.20-40)
should be brought in the county court.
 
4.A claim to recover goods subject to a regulated hire-purchase or conditional sale agreement may only be started in the
county court for the district in which the debtor (or one of the debtors) resides or carries on business (or did when the last
payment was made): CPR Pt 7 PD7B.4.1.
 
5.Other claims to recover goods must be started in the court for the district where the defendant (or one of the defendants)
resides or carries on business or where the goods are situated: CPR Pt 7 PD7B.4.2.
 
6.An application by a debtor or hirer for a time order under CCA s.129(1)(b) or 129(1)(ba) must be brought in the court
for the district where the claimant resides or carries on business: CPR, Pt 7 PD7B.4.3.
General
20-37

Procedure, UKBC-BULLENL 459371687 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
As set out above, procedure, though improved greatly from the initial provisions of the CPR, is still hugely and unnecessarily
complicated and it is vital to get it right. In common with the general scheme of the CPR that litigation is, as far as possible, to
be crammed into the strait-jacket of inflexible forms, where the rules and practice directions require a pleading in the category
of credit or hire to contain specified information, that information has to be included (whether relevant or irrelevant) and also
(this is very important) included in the correct order. Pleadings which do not comply risk being rejected, particularly by county
court staff under the eye of a martinet district judge.
Pre-action protocol
20-38
Actions must now be preceded by a pre-action protocol, Protocol XIII (see paras 19-09).
10 categories of case
20-39
10 categories of case may be discerned:
 
1.Claims by creditors or owners for delivery of goods supplied under unregulated hire-purchase and conditional sale
agreements where the debtor or hirer is not a corporation.
 
2.Other claims by creditors or owners under unregulated hire-purchase and conditional sale agreements irrespective of the
status of the debtor or hirer.
 
3.Claims by creditors or owners for delivery of goods supplied under regulated hire-purchase and conditional sale
agreements.
 
4.Other claims by creditors or owners under regulated hire-purchase and conditional sale agreements.
 
5.Claims by debtors or hirers for time orders under s.129.
 
6.Claims by creditors or owners for enforcement orders.
 
7.Re-opening extortionate credit bargains or agreements where there has been an “unfair relationship”.
 
8.Sureties, assignees and personal representatives.
 
9.Other cases governed by the “Consumer Credit Act Procedure”.
 
10.Other credit and hire cases including cases brought on the statutory cause of action created by FSMA s.150 (now
s.138D).
Mortgages where the debt secured arises under a regulated agreement would constitute an eleventh (or possibly an eleventh and
a twelfth) category but they are dealt with elsewhere in this work.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
