Claim against defendant who is an unauthorised person in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim against defendant who is an unauthorised person in
relation to conduct of a regulated activity
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 12 - Financial Services
Claim against defendant who is an unauthorised person in relation to conduct of a regulated activity
1.
12-E1
The Defendant is and was at all material times carrying on a regulated activity in the United Kingdom within the meaning of
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (“the Act”), namely [give details of the business alleged, e.g. managing portfolios
of investments].
2.
The Defendant is and at all material times has been carrying on such investment business in contravention of the general
prohibition in s.19 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 in that the Defendant is not and never has been an
authorised person within the meaning of that Act.
3.
By an agreement made on or about [specify the date] the Claimant agreed with the Defendant that the Defendant would
manage a portfolio of investments in consideration of an annual fee of 1 per cent of the market value of such investments.
Between [dates] the Claimant transferred to C.D. Limited, which is a nominee company controlled by the Defendant the
investments specified in the Schedule hereto.
4.
The Claimant has paid to the Defendant the sum of [amount] as commission under the said agreement.
5.
Notwithstanding a demand by the Claimant the Defendant has failed and neglected to cause C.D. Limited to re-transfer
the said investments to the Claimant. C.D. Limited has disposed of the said investments and is unable to account to the
Claimant for the said investments or for the dividends declared thereon and received by it.
6.
The Claimant is entitled by virtue of s.26 of the Act to recover the amount of the said commission and the property
transferred to the Defendant or its value and compensation to be fixed by the Court for the loss of dividends and other
income from the said investments.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Repayment of the sum of [amount] paid to the Defendant under the said agreement as commission;

Claim against defendant who is an unauthorised person in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(2)An Order that the Defendant do procure the re-vesting in the Claimant of the investments listed in the Schedule
hereto; alternatively
 
(3)Payment by the Defendant to the Claimant of the value of each of the said investments at the date of transfer by
the Claimant;
 
(4)An Inquiry as to the amount of the dividends and other income which would have been received by the Claimant
but for the transfer of the said investments to C.D. Limited;
 
(5)Payment by the Defendant of the amount ascertained on making the said inquiry;
 
(6)Interest on all sums found due from the Defendant to the Claimant at such rate and for such period as may be
just by way of further compensation pursuant to s.26 of the Act alternatively interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior
Courts Act 1981;
 
(7)Costs;
 
(8)Further or other relief.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
