No statutory form for reply and defence to counterclaim, UKBC-BULLENL 459371789...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
No statutory form for reply and defence to counterclaim
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part H. - Defences against Actions by the Borrower or Hirer
Reply and defence to Part 20 Counterclaim by the borrower in respect of a claim based on breaches of contract (all
agreements)
No statutory form for reply and defence to counterclaim
Reply
1.
20-F44
By way of reply, the Claimant denies the validity of the Defence.
2.
The Claimant admits that the agreement contained clause 6 which purports to exclude all conditions and warranties as to
the fitness or condition of the goods. The Claimant denies that the Defendant is entitled to rely on clause 6 on the ground
that the Claimant dealt with the Defendant as a consumer and not in the course of a business.
3.
Further, the Claimant denies that it would be reasonable for the Defendant to rely upon clause 6 and puts the Defendant
to proof of the reasonableness of the clause.
4.
In the circumstances the Defendant remains liable to the Claimant as set out in the Particulars of Claim.

No statutory form for reply and defence to counterclaim, UKBC-BULLENL 459371789...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Defence to Part 20 Counterclaim
5.
By way of defence to the Defendant’s Part 20 counterclaim, the Claimant repeats his reply herein.
6.
The Claimant denies that he was in breach of the agreement either as alleged in the counterclaim or at all.
7.
Alternatively by reason of the Defendant’s prior repudiation of the agreement which was accepted by the Claimant as set
out in the Particulars of Claim, the Claimant’s obligations under the agreement ceased and the Claimant ceased to be liable
to pay instalments of rent.
8.
Alternatively, if, which is denied, the Claimant was in breach of the agreement, the Defendant failed to serve a notice of
default and termination [(in cases regulated by the CCA) pursuant to s.87 of the Consumer Credit Act 1974 alternatively
served a notice of default which failed to comply with the Consumer Credit (Enforcement, Default and Termination
Notices) Regulations 1983].
9.
In the premises, the Defendant is not entitled to the relief claimed in the counterclaim or to any relief.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
