No statutory form for reply, UKBC-BULLENL 459371685 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
No statutory form for reply
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: pre-contract events
Reply by lender to a defence under s.59 of the CCA, No statutory form of Reply
No statutory form for reply
1.
20-F51
By way of reply, the Claimant denies the validity of the defence.
2.
The Claimant denies that the agreement referred to in the Particulars of Claim was an agreement to enter into a prospective
regulated agreement and was therefore void under s.59 of the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”).
3.
Alternatively, if, which is denied, the said agreement was an agreement to enter into a prospective regulated agreement,
the Claimant will say that:
 
(a)The prospective regulated agreement was a restricted-use credit agreement for fixed-sum credit to finance the
purchase of goods where the Defendant held himself out as requiring the goods for the purposes of a business carried
on by him, in that the Defendant stated in a letter to the Claimant dated [date] (copy annexed to this Reply) that he
required the vehicle the subject matter of the prospective regulated agreement for use in his business.
 
(b)The said agreement when signed by the Defendant embodied the information in relation to the prospective regulated
agreement which was required to be included in a quotation by the Consumer Credit (Quotations) Regulations 1989.
 
(c)The said agreement was signed by the Defendant at the premises of the Claimant.
4.
In the premises, even if, which is denied, the agreement was an agreement to enter into a prospective regulated agreement,
the agreement was exempted from the provisions of s.59 of the CCA by regulation 2 of the Consumer Credit (Agreements
to Enter Prospective Agreements) (Exemptions) Regulations 1983.
5.
In the premises, the said agreement remains enforceable against the Defendant.
[Statement of truth]

No statutory form for reply, UKBC-BULLENL 459371685 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
