To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part H. - Defences against Actions by the Borrower or Hirer
Defence and Part 20 Counterclaim to a borrower’s action based on breaches of contract (all agreements) (separate
document)
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
Defence
1.
20-F43
The Defendant admits and avers that it entered into the agreement with the Claimant set out in and annexed to the Claim
Form.
2.
The Defendant denies that the agreement was subject to the express or implied terms set out in the Particulars of Claim
or any terms to the like effect.
3.
The Defendant denies that the Claimant dealt with the Defendant as a consumer. The Defendant will say that the Claimant
was acquiring the goods which are the subject matter of the agreement in the course of his business as [specify nature
of business].
4.
The Defendant will therefore rely upon clause 6 of the agreement which provides that where the hirer is not a consumer, all
conditions and warranties as to the condition, quality, description or fitness for any purpose of the goods (whether implied
by common law or by statute) are excluded.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
5.
The Defendant will contend that it is reasonable for the Defendant to rely upon the exclusions and restrictions contained
in clause 6 of the agreement and will rely upon the following matters:
 
(a)the Claimant and the Defendant have similar bargaining positions, alternatively bargaining positions which favour
the Claimant [details];
 
(b)the Claimant could have entered into a [hire-purchase] agreement with other credit companies on terms which
would not have included an exemption clause similar to clause 6 of the agreement;
 
(c)the Claimant well knew of clause 6 which was specifically drawn to his attention by the supplier before he signed
the agreement;
 
(d)the goods were specially adapted to the Claimant’s requirements [details].
6.
Even if, which is denied, the alleged terms of any of them were terms of the agreement, the Defendant denies that it is in
breach of them either as alleged or at all. The allegations concerning defects in the goods are denied.
7.
In the premises, it is denied that the Defendant is liable to the Claimant either as alleged in the Particulars of Claim or at
all. Alternatively, if, which is denied, the Defendant is liable to the Claimant, the Defendant will seek to set off against
such liability such sums as it may be awarded by way of counterclaim herein.
Part 20 Counterclaim
8.
By way of counterclaim, the Defendant repeats the defence herein.
9.
In breach of the agreement, the Claimant failed to pay the instalment of rent due on [date] or any instalment due thereafter.
10.
On [date] the Defendant served upon the Claimant a notice of default and termination (copy annexed to this Defence)
requiring the Claimant to pay the current arrears of £[..........] within 14 days of the service of the notice and stating that, if
such arrears were not paid within such period, upon the expiry of the period, the agreement and the hiring should forthwith
determine and the Claimant should no longer be in possession of the goods with the consent of the Defendant.
11.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
The Claimant failed to pay the said sum within the said period and on [date] the agreement duly determined.
12.
Further or alternatively, by reason of the said breaches of the agreement, the Claimant evinced an intention no longer to
be bound by the agreement and repudiated it. By the said notice of default and termination, the Defendant accepted such
repudiation.
13.
Notwithstanding the termination of the agreement, the Claimant has failed to deliver up the goods to the Defendant.
14.
Further by reason of the said breaches and/or repudiation of the agreement, the Defendant has suffered loss and damage in
the balance of the hire-purchase price of £[..........] less the value of the vehicle (if recovered) and a discount for accelerated
payment.
15.
The value of the goods at the date hereof is £[..........].
The Defendant therefore counterclaims:
 
(1)An order for delivery up of the goods or £[..........] their value.
 
(2)£[..........] arrears of instalments.
 
(3)£[..........] contractual interest accrued from [date when each sum became due] to the date of the issue of the claim
and continuing at the daily rate of £[..........] until judgment.
[or, where appropriate]
 
(3)Interest under the Late Payment of Commercial Debts (Interest) Act 1998 in the sum of £[..........], calculated at
an annual rate of x% from [date when each sum became due] to the date of the issue of the claim, and continuing at
the daily rate of £[..........] until judgment.
[and, for contracts made after 6 August 2002]
 
(4)Sum payable under s.5A of the Late Payment of Commercial Debts (Interest) Act 1998: £[..........].
[followed by]
 
(4) [(5)]Further or alternatively: damages for breach of contract.
 
(5) [(6)]Interest on damages at the contractual rate alternatively interest under [s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984]
[s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981] at the rate of x% on all sums due from [date] to judgment.
[Statement of truth]

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
Notes
 
1.Where the Part 20 counterclaim seeks delivery of goods or a money order in respect of a regulated hire-purchase or
conditional sale agreement, an over-literal reading of Part 20 might indicate that the Defendant would have to give all
the particulars required by Part 7, PD7B (see the section on Claims). The editor’s assumption that counterclaims will be
accepted when pleaded without the elaborate list of particulars, given the premise that the hirer or buyer must surely, as
Claimant, be able to identify the agreement on which he is relying.
 
2.When Part 2 of the Consumer Rights Act 2015 came into force, the provisions relating to consumers in the Unfair Contract
Terms Act 1977 were transferred to that Act for contracts made on or after 1 October 2015. This form assumes that the
exclusion clause may be challenged by a non-consumer under that Act and is designed to advance a defence invoking the
criteria in Schedule 2 to the 1977 Act.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
