To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 27 - Surety
Surety’s Defences
Defence setting up defences/cross-claims open to principal debtor
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate document
1.
27-F9
The Defendant admits that he executed the guarantee annexed to the Claim Form, whereby he guaranteed the liabilities of
PQ to the Claimant under the contract alleged in the Particulars of Claim to have been made between PQ and the Claimant
(“the contract”).
2.
The Defendant further admits that by the letter dated [date] annexed to the Claim Form, the Claimant demanded payment
by the Defendant pursuant to the guarantee of the sum of £[..........] alleged to be due from PQ to the Claimant. For the
reasons hereinafter set out, at the date of the letter no sum was owed by PQ to the Claimant and the Defendant is not liable
to the Claimant in the said or any sum.
3.
The contract was a contract whereby the Claimant and PQ agreed unlawfully to evade the payment of value added tax on
[identify dutiable goods] sold by them and was thus void for illegality.
Or
3.
The contract provided for the Claimant to sell and deliver [identify the goods] (“the goods”) to PQ. In breach of the contract
the Claimant failed to deliver the goods to PQ. In the premises there was a total failure of consideration and PQ was not
liable to pay the Claimant the price of the goods or any part thereof.
Or
3.
The contract provided for the Claimant to sell to PQ [identify the goods] (“the goods”). There were necessarily implied
conditions of the contract that the goods should be of satisfactory quality and reasonably fit for the purposes for which PQ
required them, namely for [identify any relevant purpose].

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4.
In breach of the contract, the goods were not of satisfactory quality nor were they reasonably fit for the said purpose.
Particulars
 
(a)[set out details of breach]
5.
By reason of the breach of contract PQ suffered loss and damage.
Particulars
 
(a)[set out heads of loss]
6.
It is admitted that £[..........] of the balance of the purchase price due under the contract remained unpaid by PQ. By reason
of the matters set out above, PQ was entitled to set off his said losses against that balance so as to extinguish it.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
