Claim for damages for negligence against a surveyor, UKBC-BULLENL 459373398 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for damages for negligence against a surveyor
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 2
Part Y - Professional Negligence
Chapter 85 - Professional Negligence
Claim for damages for negligence against a surveyor
1.
85-Y2
The Defendants are and were at all material times surveyors carrying on their practice at [address].
2.
By an oral contract made on or about [date], between the Claimant and one XY acting on behalf of the Defendants [or as
the case may be], the Claimant retained and employed the Defendants for payment to act as his surveyors to survey the
freehold property situate at [address] and known as [name] and to report to him on its condition.
3.
At all material times, the Defendants well knew that the Claimant required the survey and report for the purpose of
considering whether to purchase the property and if so at what price and on what terms.
4.
In the circumstances, it was a term and condition of the retainer and the Defendants thereby warranted, alternatively the
Defendants were under a duty of care, that they would exercise all reasonable care and skill in carrying out the survey and
in making the report, and in particular that they would observe and report all visible defects in the property and all other
signs and matters from which the existence or probable or possible existence of defects ought reasonably to be inferred
and what measures would be required to be taken to remedy such defects.
5.
In purported performance of the retainer, the Defendants carried out a survey of the property, and submitted their report
dated [date], to the Claimant.
6.
Acting on the basis of the survey and report and in reliance thereon the Claimant on [date], purchased the property at the
price of £[..........].
7.
In carrying on the survey and in making the report, the Defendants, their servants or agents were guilty of breaches of the
contract terms and conditions, and/or in breach of their duty of care in:
Particulars
 
(a)Failing to observe or to report to the Claimant that there was wet rot affecting the timber of the roof joists of the
property.

Claim for damages for negligence against a surveyor, UKBC-BULLENL 459373398 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(b)Failing to observe or to suspect or to report to the Claimant that it was probable or possible that wet rot might be
affecting the rafters and the wooden lintels over the windows of the front and back bedrooms.
 
(c)Failing to observe or to suspect or to report to the Claimant that there were cracks at the back of the property
through which it was reasonably probable or possible that water might be entering which would affect the timbers
of the property.
 
(d)Stating in their report that there was no rot in the property.
 
(e)Stating in their report that “generally speaking the property was in a reasonably good state of repair” and advising
the Claimant that except for a few minor matters, there was no reason why the Claimant should not proceed with
the purchase of the property.
 
(f)In the circumstances, failing to exercise reasonable care and skill in carrying out the survey and making the report.
8.
By reason of these matters the value of the property was in fact worth far less than its value as reported on by the Defendants,
and the Claimant has incurred substantial costs and expenses in rectifying the defects, and he and his family have been put
to much trouble, inconvenience and discomfort and he has thereby suffered loss and damage.
Particulars
[Set out in full detail the nature and extent of the loss and damage claimed.]
9.
Further, the Claimant claims interest upon all sums recovered pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 at such rate
and for such period as the Court shall deem appropriate.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Damages.
 
(2)Interest on damages pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
