To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Buyer’s Defences
Defence of rejection for breach of express condition of quality and rescission for misrepresentation
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate document
1.
25-F62
The Defendant admits that he entered into the oral agreement with the Claimant whereby the Claimant agreed to sell to
the Defendant the goods referred to in the Particulars of Claim.
2.
In the course of oral negotiations at the Claimant’s premises at [address], the Claimant represented to the Defendant that:
 
(a)[set out representations relied on]
3.
The Defendant acted in reliance on the said representations when entering into the sale agreement.
4.
Further or alternatively the representations were express conditions of the agreement and were evidenced by the
Defendant’s invoice (copy annexed to these Particulars of Claim) which stated:
 
(a)[set out the express terms as to quality and condition]
5.
The said representations were false and the Claimant was in breach of the said condition in that:
 
(a)[give particulars of matters relied on]
6.
By reason of the said misrepresentations, the Defendant was entitled to rescsind the agreement. Alternatively by reason
of the Claimant’s breaches of the said condition, the Claimant repudiated the agreement. By a letter dated [date] (copy
annexed to this Defence) the Defendant duly rescinded the agreement and/or accepted the Claimant’s repudiation of it and
on [date] returned the goods to the Claimant.

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
7.
In the premises the Claimant is not entitled to payment of the purchase price or any part thereof.
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9]
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
