Hire-purchase, UKBC-BULLENL 459371741 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Hire-purchase
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Hire-purchase
20-05
A hire-purchase agreement is an agreement whereby the owner of a chattel lets it on hire to a hirer for a fixed period and
agrees that upon the happening of a stated event (usually, but not necessarily, the exercise by the hirer of an option to purchase),
property in the chattel will pass to the hirer. The acquirer is a hirer until the option is exercised and then becomes a buyer. The
essential point to note is that hire-purchase is not a contract of sale and although people (even, regrettably practitioners and
judges) sometimes speak of “buying on hire-purchase”, this is not only incorrect but misleading, creating the false belief that
the hirer, like a purchaser, has title to the goods which he can dispose of by sale or otherwise.
The key elements of hire-purchase are:
 
1.the creditor owns the goods and remains owner until the option to purchase is exercised;
 
2.the hirer obtains physical possession of the goods and accepts the obligations of a hirer of goods;
 
3.the hirer is not obliged to exercise the option or acquire title;
 
4.if the hirer defaults, (subject to statutory controls) the owner can terminate the agreement, repossess the goods and sell
or re-let them.
As with any area where it is necessary to assign a contract to a particular category, courts will have regard to the substance of a
contract rather than its appearance. If a contract has these essential elements, it will be a hire-purchase contract whatever terms
the parties may care to have used. 3  The wide range of controls over virtually all forms of chattel acquisition other than outright
sale have removed most of the point from trying to disguise hire-purchase as something else, but parties sometimes do mistake
the category into which an agreement comes and this can lead to problems of enforcement if the wrong prescribed wording
is used in the written contract. Note that the term ‘lease-purchase’, though undoubtedly more classy, is entirely synonymous
with ‘hire-purchase’.
Analysis of a hire-purchase situation is essential. Virtually all hire-purchase involves three parties: a supplier of the goods, a
creditor and a hirer. There will be a contract whereby the supplier sells the goods to the creditor and a second (and separate)
contract whereby the creditor lets them on hire-purchase to the hirer. The mistake is often made (and not only by lay people) of
believing that the hirer has “bought” the goods from the supplier with a loan from the creditor. This may be the financial reality
of the transaction but it is not the legal reality. There may be no contract (or, at best, only a collateral contract) between the
hirer and the supplier and, at common law, the creditor was only in very rare cases made liable for the supplier’s representations
or warranties to the hirer.
Note that, in hire-purchases cases, the terms “creditor” (now “lender”) and “owner” are used interchangeably. It is probably
better to use the term “owner” both because it is preferred by the CCA and because it keeps firmly in everyone’s mind that the
juridical basis of the contract is the hire of a chattel with an option to purchase.
Statutory definition of hire-purchase
20-06

Hire-purchase, UKBC-BULLENL 459371741 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
The definition of hire-purchase under s.189(1) of the CCA is very wide and should be noted as it affects not only control but
the procedural requirements of pleading (see below):
“an agreement, other than a conditional sale agreement, under which:
 
(a)goods are bailed or (in Scotland) hired in return for periodical payments by the person to whom they are
bailed or hired, and
 
(b)the property in the goods will pass to that person if the terms of the agreement are complied with and one
or more of the following occurs:
 
(i)the exercise of an option to purchase by that person,
 
(ii)the doing of any other specified act by any party to the agreement,
 
(iii)the happening of any other specified event”.
The statutory definition was reworded in 2014 by the RAO art.60L but the essentials of the definition remain the same. Yet a
further definition of hire-purchase is attempted by the Consumer Rights Act 2015 but, happily, it is not relevant to this section.
Footnotes
3
Staffs Motor Guarantee Ltd v British Wagon Co [1934] 2 K.B. 305.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
