Claim by purchaser for specific performance of contract to..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim by purchaser for specific performance of contract to sell
shares
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 16 - Sale of Shares
Claim by purchaser for specific performance of contract to sell shares
1.
16-E2
By an agreement in writing dated [date] the defendant agreed to sell to the claimant who agreed to purchase 4,000 ordinary
shares of £1 each in C.D. Limited at a price of £150,000 payable as to £75,000 on execution of the agreement and as
to £75,000 on the first anniversary of the completion of the sale provided always that the net profit of the Company as
certified by the auditors thereof for the accounting year of the Company expiring next before the first anniversary of the
completion of the contract should exceed the sum of £50,000.
2.
By clause [number] of the agreement it was provided that completion of the sale should take place on [date].
3.
It was an implied term of the agreement that the defendant would deliver to the claimant on the date for completion a duly
executed transfer of the shares and the certificate relating thereto or deposit the certificate relating to the shares with the
secretary of the Company for splitting.
4.
The claimant has duly paid the said sum of £75,000 on the execution of the agreement but the defendant has wrongfully
refused to complete the sale and wrongfully refused to transfer the shares to the claimant.
5.
By reason of the foregoing the Claimant has suffered loss and damage.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Specific performance of the said agreement;
 
(2)Damages in addition to or in lieu of specific performance;
 
(3)Damages for breach of contract;
 
(4)Costs;
 
(5)Further or other relief.
[Statement of truth]

Claim by purchaser for specific performance of contract to..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
