To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part J. - Unfair Relationships between Lenders and Borrowers
Defence by a borrower seeking relief under ss.140A to 140C of the CCA
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
Defence and Counterclaim
Defence
1.
20-F68
The Defendant admits that he entered into the agreement with the Claimant set out the Particulars of Claim (“the
agreement”). The agreement was a credit agreement within the meaning of s.140C(1) of the Consumer Credit Act 1974
(“the Act”).
2.
The relationship between the Claimant as lender and the Defendant as borrower was unfair to the Defendant.
Particulars
 
(a)the following terms of the agreement [and of the related agreement (identify the related agreement)] were unfair
 
(i)[set out the relevant terms with a short statement of why it is said they are unfair]
 
(ii)…
 
(b)the way in which the Claimant has exercised or enforced his rights under the agreement was unfair in that
 
(i)[set out the matters complained of]
 
(ii)…
 
(c)the following things done by or on behalf of the Claimant were unfair to the Defendant:
 
(i)[set out the conduct complained of]
 
(ii)…

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
3.
The Defendant will therefore ask the court to make an order:
 
(a)requiring the Claimant to repay to the Defendant (or a named surety) the following sums (identify the sums to be
repaid);
 
(b)requiring the Claimant to take the following action in relation to the agreement (identify the action);
 
(c)reduce or discharge the following sum payable by the Claimant under the agreement namely (identify the sum);
 
(d)directing the return of the following property held as security (identify the property)
 
(e)set aside or discharge the following obligations of the Defendant under the agreement (identify the obligations
whose discharge is sought);
 
(f)effecting the following changes to the terms of the agreement (set out the terms it is desired to change with a short
statement of the changes sought)
 
(g)directing the following accounts to be taken (identify the accounts sought).
Counterclaim
4.
By way of counterclaim the Defendant repeats the defence herein.
The Defendant therefore counterclaims:
 
(1)The making of such order under s.140B of the Consumer Credit Act 1974 as may be appropriate.
 
(2)Interest pursuant to s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984 on any sums found to be due or payable on the making
of the order.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
