Particulars of claim to be attached in Claim Form N1 or..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Particulars of claim to be attached in Claim Form N1 or served
subsequently
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 21 - Commission Agents
Claims by Agents against Principals
Claim for commission, an account and on quantum meruit
Particulars of claim to be attached in Claim Form N1 or served subsequently
1.
21-F2
By a written agreement made on the [date] the Defendant appointed the Claimant as its sole agent for the sale of [identify
the goods] (“the goods”) in [identify geographical area]. A copy of the agency agreement is annexed to this Claim Form.
2.
Pursuant to the agreement, the Claimant acted as a self-employed sales agent with continuing authority to negotiate and
conclude the sale of the goods. The Claimant was thereby a commercial agent within the meaning of the Commercial Agents
(Council Directive) Regulations 1993, (“the Regulations”). The relationship between the Claimant and the Defendant was
governed by the Regulations.
3.
By regulation 4, a duty was imposed upon the Defendant to act dutifully and in good faith towards the Claimant.
4.
Regulation 6 provided that, in the absence of any agreement as to remuneration between the parties, the Claimant was
entitled to the remuneration that commercial agents appointed for the goods are customarily allowed in the United Kingdom
or, if there was no customary practice, reasonable remuneration taking into account all the aspects of the transaction.
5.
By regulation 7, the Claimant was entitled to commission on sales concluded during the period covered by the agency
agreement where those sales had been concluded as a result of the Claimant’s action.
6.
By regulation 10, commission became due as soon as the purchaser or the Defendant executed a sales contract and payable
not later than the last day of the month following the quarter in which the commission became due.

Particulars of claim to be attached in Claim Form N1 or..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
7.
By regulation 12, the Defendant was required to supply the Claimant with a statement of commission due, not later than the
last day of the month following the quarter in which the commission became due and which set out the main components
used in calculating the amount of commission.
8.
From [date] and continuing, the Defendant has concluded sales of the goods which occurred as a result of the Claimant’s
action pursuant to the agreement. The Claimant is unable to provide details of such sales prior to the taking of an account.
9.
The Defendant has failed to comply with the Regulations.
Particulars
The Defendant:
 
(i)has failed to act dutifully to the Claimant and, in particular, has failed to supply the Claimant with statements of
commission due as required by the Regulations or at all;
 
(ii)has failed to pay the Claimant commission on sales concluded by it as a result of the Claimant’s action.
10.
In the absence of an agreement as to the amount of commission payable to him, the Claimant is entitled to the remuneration
that commercial agents appointed for the goods are customarily allowed in the United Kingdom. The Claimant will say that
the customary rate of commission is x% of the retail price. Alternatively, the Claimant is entitled to reasonable remuneration
taking into account all the aspects of the transaction.
11.
The Claimant is entitled to an account of all sales concluded by the Defendant as a result of the Claimant’s actions since
the date of the agreement and an order for the payment of commission on such sales pursuant to the Regulations.
The Claimant therefore claims:
 
(1)An account of all sales of the goods from [date] concluded by the Defendant as a result of the Claimant’s actions.
 
(2)An order that the Defendant do pay the Claimant all sums found due to him upon the taking of the account.
 
(3)£[..........] contractual interest alternatively interest under [s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984] [s.35A of the Senior
Courts Act 1981]
[or, where appropriate]
 
(3)Interest under the Late Payment of Commercial Debts (Interest) Act 1998 calculated at an annual rate of x
[and, for contracts made after 6 August 2002]
 
(4)The appropriate sum payable under s.5A of the Late Payment of Commercial Debts (Interest) Act 1998.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
