Defences of the seller, UKBC-BULLENL 459372191 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defences of the seller
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Defences
Defences of the seller
25-52
Claims by the buyer will normally fall into one or both of two categories, claims for non-delivery or late delivery of goods and
claims based on breaches of terms of the sale contract (the latter being frequently coupled with allegations of misrepresentation).
Claims for non-delivery or late delivery
25-53
Apart from denial of the facts relied on by the buyer, defences to claims for non-delivery or late delivery will normally be based
on an express or implied term which would permit non-delivery or late delivery in the circumstances which have occurred (e.g.
failure by or inability of the buyer to pay the purchase price) or on some external event preventing delivery but not involving
fault on the part of the seller (e.g. loss or destruction of the goods at a time when the goods were at the risk of the buyer).
An unpaid seller is given certain rights by the Act, a seller being “unpaid” for these purposes if either the whole price has not
been paid or tendered or a bill of exchange or other negotiable instrument has been received as conditional payment and the
condition has not been met (either by dishonour or otherwise) (SGA s.38).
An unpaid seller may exercise a lien over the goods until payment or tender of the price, where the goods have been sold without
any agreement as to credit or where the agreed term of credit has expired or where the buyer becomes insolvent (SGA s.41)
and a seller who has made part-delivery can, unless he has waived his lien, retain the undelivered balance against payment
(SGA s.42). The lien is lost by delivery to a carrier for transmission to the buyer, by the buyer or his agent lawfully obtaining
possession of the goods and by waiver (SGA s.43).
An unpaid seller who delivers goods to a carrier or other bailee for transmission to the buyer can stop them in transit if the
buyer becomes insolvent and resume his lien (SGA s.44) by retaking possession of the goods or by notifying the carrier or other
bailee in possession of them (or if he is an agent, by notifying his principal) (SGA s.46).
Exercise of the lien or the right of stoppage in transit does not of itself rescind the contract of sale (SGA s.48(1)) but, if the
goods are perishable or if the seller gives notice of his intention to resell and the buyer does not pay or tender the price within a
reasonable time, the seller can resell the goods and claim damages for breach of contract from the original buyer (SGA s.48(3)).
Claims based on alleged breaches of contractual terms
25-54
Defences to these claims, apart again from denial of the facts relied on, tend to fall into one or more of the following categories:
 
(a)denial of the existence of an express term relied on by the buyer;

Defences of the seller, UKBC-BULLENL 459372191 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(b)denial of the implication of the statutory terms on the ground that the circumstances in which the Act will imply the term
were not present (e.g. with a claim for breach of the condition of reasonable fitness, a denial that the purpose for which the
goods were required was communicated to the seller or a denial that the buyer relied on the skill and judgment of the seller);
 
(c)reliance on acceptance of the goods by the buyer as a bar to his treating what would otherwise be a breach of condition
as grounds for treating the contract as repudiated by the seller;
 
(d)reliance on an exemption clause valid under (or despite) the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, the Unfair Terms in
Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999 or the CRA Pt 2 (see para.25-02);
 
(e)in the case of a claim based on a breach of SGA s.12 or CRA s.17, reliance on the assertion that, despite any breach, the
buyer has in fact obtained title because of one of the exceptions to the rule nemo dat qui non habet.
In some cases, the buyer will have refused to pay all or part of the purchase price and the defence will incorporate a counterclaim
for the price or the balance due.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
