Defence alleging failure to disclose special or unusual..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defence alleging failure to disclose special or unusual features of
guarantee/principal contract
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 13 - Guarantees
Defence alleging failure to disclose special or unusual features of guarantee/principal contract
1.
13-E5
The Defendant is the wife of AB, a director of and shareholder in a company, G Limited (“the Company”). AB was a
customer of the [..........] branch of B Bank and the Company’s accounts were held at the same branch.
2.
It is admitted that on or about [date], the Defendant executed an unlimited guarantee (“the Guarantee”) of the liabilities of
G Limited to B Bank Plc. A copy of this Guarantee is attached to the Particulars of Claim in this action, marked “A”.
3.
On or about [date], and at Mr Z’s request, the Defendant attended the branch of B Bank without her husband, and met
with Mr Z. The execution of the Guarantee by the Defendant was procured by the implied misrepresentation and/or non-
disclosure of the Claimant’s agent, Mr Z, who was the manager at the [..........] branch of B Bank, and with whom the
Defendant dealt in relation to the Guarantee.
Particulars
[Set out in full detail, in short and simple sentences the particulars of the implied misrepresentation and/or non-disclosure.]
 
(i)At this meeting, Mr Z asked the Defendant to sign the Guarantee without disclosing to the Defendant that the other
two directors and shareholders in G Limited had met with Mr Z the day before and it had been agreed that the most
recent accounts of G Limited were a cause for very great concern as the company was running at a substantial trading
loss.
 
(ii)Mr Z further failed to disclose to the Defendant before she signed the Guarantee that it had been agreed at that
meeting that the provision for doubtful debts in the accounts of G Limited was a woeful underestimate and that a
much greater provision would have to be made in the following half-yearly accounts, thus increasing the loss figures
by £300,000 in the next set of accounting figures.
4.
In failing to disclose the matters set out above, in circumstances where (1) those matters could not usually have been
expected by the Defendant to have taken place and (2) those matters were within Mr Z’s knowledge from the meeting
on the previous day, Mr Z impliedly represented to the Defendant that there were no unusual features in the Guarantee
transaction. That representation was false for the reasons set out above.
5.
In these circumstances, the Defendant is entitled to and does claim rescission of the Guarantee.

Defence alleging failure to disclose special or unusual..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
AND the Defendant claims:
 
(1)A declaration that the Guarantee ought to be rescinded/set aside as having been procured by the non disclosure
and/or implied misrepresentations of the Claimant;
 
(2)An order that the Bank do deliver up the Guarantee to be cancelled forthwith.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
