Remedies for consumers (Consumer Rights Act), UKBC-BULLENL 459372263 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Remedies for consumers (Consumer Rights Act)
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Action for breach of condition or warranty
Remedies for consumers (Consumer Rights Act)
25-35
Though the remedies are largely similar to those contained in SGAQ Pt 5A, there are changes and additions. These are very
complex and are summarised in CRA s.19. They cover any failure of the goods to conform to the contract unless the failure
is due to materials supplied by the consumer— s.19(2).
If the goods fail to conform because of a breach of CRA ss.9 (satisfactory quality), 10 (fitness), 11 (description), 13 (sample),
14 (model) or 16 (digital content) then, under s.19(3) the remedies are:
 
(a)The short-term right to reject;
 
(b)The right to repair or replacement;
 
(c)The right to a price reduction or the final right to reject.
If the goods fail to conform with CRA s.15 (installation) there is the right to repair or replacement or the right to a price reduction
or final right to reject. If the trader is in breach because the information given under the 2013 Regulations is wrong (breach of
CRA s.12) the consumer can recover costs incurred up to the price of the goods—s.19(5).
Breach of CRA s.17 (right to supply) the only remedy is rejection—CRA s.19(6). The CRA does not prevent the consumer
from pursuing any other contractual remedy such as damages or specific performance in addition to or in substitution for the
remedies afforded by the Act, subject to there being no double recovery—CRA s.19(9) to (11) but the right to reject in s.19
precludes the consumer from also treating the contract as repudiated—CRA s.19(12) and (13).
Finally, goods which are shown not to conform at any time within six months of delivery are presumed not to have conformed
at delivery subject to the trader’s right to prove the contrary—CRA s.19(14) and (15).
CRA s.20 contains the right to reject and provides that the right, when arising, is exercised by the consumer ‘indicating’ to the
trader that he is rejecting the goods and that the contract is at an end and almost any indication will do, providing its meaning
is clear—s.20(5) and (6). On rejection the trader must give the consumer a refund of money paid and/or in respect of other
goods traded in exchange. This must be done “without undue delay” and in any event within 14 days and must use the same
means of payment as originally used by the consumer. The trader cannot charge a fee (so the trader cannot deduct from a credit
card repayment the commission he had to pay the card company on accepting the card for the purchase). At the same time the
consumer must make the goods available for collection by the trader or (if this is agreed by the contract) to return the goods to
the trader but, in general, the trader must bear the costs of the consumer returning the goods. Section 21: Commission Agents
contains rules for partial rejection of goods.
25-36
A consumer with a short-term right to reject will lose it if it is not exercised within the time limit unless the trader agrees to
extend the time limit (it cannot be agreed to abridge it)—CRA s.22(1) and (2). The time limit is 30 days after all three of the
following have occurred: passing of title (or possession for hire-purchase and conditional sale), delivery of the goods and, when
goods require work or installation, the time when the trader notifies the consumer this has been done—s.22(3). With perishable
goods, the time limit is the expected life of the goods—s.22(4). But if the consumer requests or agrees to repair or replacement
time stops running for the ‘waiting period’ (which runs from the date of the request to the date when the trader supplies repaired

Remedies for consumers (Consumer Rights Act), UKBC-BULLENL 459372263 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
or replacement goods). If the trader fails to supply conforming goods in response to the request, the right to reject lasts for the
later of seven days after the waiting period or the original time limit plus the waiting period.
Where there is a right to repair or replacement, then, unless it is impossible or disproportionate, the trader must repair or replace
within a reasonable time and without significant inconvenience to the consumer and at his own expense—CRA s.23. The
consumer must allow the trader a reasonable time to comply— s.23(9) and (7).
CRA s.24 provides for a right to a price reduction and a final right to reject. The former is a right to “require the trader to reduce
by an appropriate amount the price the consumer is required to pay under the contract …” and to receive a refund of money paid
under the contract. This can amount to the full amount of the price—CRA s.24(2). The right to a price reduction and the final
right to reject are alternatives and cannot be exercised cumulatively—s.24(5)—and either can only be exercised at all if one
of three conditions are met. The first is that after one repair or replacement the goods still do not conform to the contract, the
second is that repair or replacement is impossible or disproportionate and the third is that the consumer has requested repair or
replacement and the trader has failed to do so within a reasonable time. Goods are treated as repaired or replaced when they are
supplied to the consumer or, if repaired at the consumer’s premises, the trader indicates the repairs are finished. If the consumer
exercises the final right to reject, any refund may be reduced by a deduction to represent the use the consumer has had of the
goods (except for any period between the consumer rejecting the goods and the trader collecting them). No deduction is made for
any use in the first six months after the original supply unless the goods consist of a motor vehicle (except for mobility vehicles).
Delivery of the wrong quantity gives a right to reject under CRA s.25 but, if not exercised, the consumer must pay for the goods
when accepted. This does not prevent the consumer from claiming damages. CRA s.26 applies the rejection rules to instalment
contracts and failure of the trader to deliver gives the consumer the right to treat the contract as at an end—s.28.
A virtually identical series of remedies is provided for digital content by CRA ss.42 to 45 and there is an additional series of
rights created by s.46 where the digital content has damaged a device belonging to the consumer or other digital content and
this could have been avoided by the exercise of reasonable care and skill by the trader—CRA s.46.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
