Proceedings covered in this title, UKBC-BULLENL 459371079 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Proceedings covered in this title
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 12 - Financial Services
Proceedings covered in this title
12-09
This title covers proceedings arising from or related to infringements of the regulatory system. In relation to some of the causes
of action covered, the term “private person” is relevant. The term is defined in the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000
(Rights of Action) Regulations 2001 (SI 2001/2256), art.3 and means:
 
(i)any individual, unless he has suffered the loss in question in the course of carrying on any regulated activity or an activity
which would be regulated but for certain exclusions 128 ;
 
(ii)any person who is not an individual, unless he suffers the loss in question in the course of carrying on business of
any kind;
 
(iii)a relevant recipient of credit (defined in the RAO art.60L as a partnership consisting of two or three persons not all
of whom are bodies corporate, or an unincorporated body of persons which does not consist entirely of bodies corporate
and is not a partnership) who is not an individual and who has suffered the loss in question in connection with any of the
following consumer credit-related regulated activities: credit broking; debt adjusting; debt counselling; debt collecting;
debt administration; entering into a regulated credit agreement as lender; entering into a regulated consumer hire agreement
as owner; providing credit information services; providing credit references; and carrying on the activity of agreeing to
carry on any of the foregoing activities; and
 
(iv)a person who is, by virtue of RAO art.36J, to be regarded as a person who uses, may use, has or may have used or has
or may have contemplated using, services provided by authorised persons in carrying on the regulated activity of operating
an electronic system in relation to lending (as set out in art.36H) or agreeing to do so (as set out in art.64).
The effect of the above is that both natural and non-natural persons are potentially “private persons”, but in the case of a natural
person (“individual”) the relevant loss must not have been suffered in the course of carrying on a regulated activity, and in the
case of a non-natural person (save as provided in (iii) and (iv) above in relation to consumer credit-related regulated activities),
the relevant loss must not arise out of the conduct of a business of any kind. 129  Local and national governments and international
organisations are excluded in all circumstances. For the purpose of (i) above, the effecting or carrying out of Lloyd’s insurance
contracts does not count as “regulated activity”.
As noted at para.12-02, FSMA s.19 prohibits the carrying on of regulated activities without authorisation or exemption. If a
person infringes the general prohibition, FSMA s.26 provides that any resulting agreement is unenforceable against the other
party. That party is given a statutory right to recover money or other property transferred by him under the agreement and
compensation for any loss sustained in consequence of the parting with it. These rights are not confined to private persons. 130
The provision does not apply if the regulated activity is accepting deposits. 131
FSMA ss.20(1) and 20(1A) provide that an authorised person who carries on a regulated activity in the UK or purports do
so without the requisite permission: (a) given by the FCA or the PRA under Pt 4A of FSMA; or (b) resulting from any other
provision of FSMA, is to be taken to have contravened, in the case of a PRA-authorised person, a requirement imposed by the
FCA and the PRA under the Act and in the case of other authorised persons, a requirement imposed by the FCA under the Act.
The authorised person may face disciplinary action by the FCA or (in the case of a PRA-authorised person), the FCA or the
PRA. In addition, in prescribed cases, the contravention is actionable as if it were a breach of statutory duty “subject to the

Proceedings covered in this title, UKBC-BULLENL 459371079 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
defences and other incidents applying to an action for breach of statutory duty”. 132  A claim may be made by a person who
suffers loss as a result of the contravention of s.20(1) or s.20(1A). 133  The conditions prescribed 134  are:
 
(i)The claimant is: (a) a private person; or (b) a fiduciary or person acting in a representative capacity for a private person
and any remedy would be exclusively for the benefit of that private person and the remedy could not be otherwise obtained;
 
(ii)The relevant infringement is not an infringement of a financial resources requirement imposed under Pt 4A of FSMA. 135
Save as provided by FSMA s.26(A) in relation to the carrying on of credit-related regulated activities, 136  the contravention of
s.20(1) or s20(1A) does not make any transaction void or unenforceable. 137
12-10
FSMA s.27 renders unenforceable against the innocent party an agreement made through an unauthorised person. The provision
applies where an agreement is entered into by an authorised person in the course of carrying on a regulated activity (without
contravention of the general prohibition, or without contravention of s.20 FSMA if it relates to a credit-related regulated activity)
in consequence of something said or done by a third party in the course of carrying on a regulated activity by the third party in
contravention of the general prohibition or in the course of carrying on a credit-related regulated activity by the third party in
contravention of s.20 138  (for example, if C, a customer, purchases a quoted share from B, an authorised broker, in consequence
of an advertisement placed by T, a third party who is not an authorised person, the purchase is unenforceable against C by B).
The other party (C, in the example) is entitled to recover any money or other property paid or transferred by him under the
agreement and compensation for any loss sustained by him as a result of having parted with it.
This provision does not apply if the regulated activity is accepting deposits. It also does not apply to a regulated credit agreement
or a regulated consumer hire agreement unless the provider knows before the agreement is made that the third party had some
involvement in the making of the agreement or matters preparatory to its making.
Where an agreement is rendered unenforceable by ss.26 or 27 (other than an agreement entered into in the course of carrying
on a credit-related regulated activity), the amount of compensation payable is to be agreed between the parties or fixed by the
court. The court may allow the agreement to be enforced or allow money or property to be retained under it, if satisfied that it is
just and equitable to do so. In so deciding, the court must take into account whether the party seeking to enforce the agreement
reasonably believed that he was not acting in contravention of the general prohibition (in a s.26 case) or knew that the relevant
third party was so acting (in a s.27 case). A party against whom an agreement is unenforceable must, if he elects not to perform
the agreement, or recovers money or property paid or transferred by him, repay any money and return any property transferred
to him under the agreement. Where property required to be returned has passed to a third party, references to it are treated
as references to the value of the property at the time when it was received by the person required to return it. This paragraph
summarises the effect of FSMA s.28.
In the case of an agreement that is entered into in the course of carrying on a credit-related regulated activity, the amount of
compensation is to be agreed by the parties or (on the application of either party) specified by the FCA in a written notice given
to the applicant. The FCA has a discretion, similar to that given to the court under s.28, to allow the agreement to be enforced,
or to allow money or property transferred to be retained (FSMA s.28A).
12-11
Where a person makes an agreement in the course of accepting deposits in breach of the general prohibition, the other party
is entitled to apply to the court to recover the deposit immediately, even if under the agreement the depositor is not entitled to
recover it immediately. The court need not make an order, if satisfied that it would not be just and equitable to do so, having
regard to whether the deposit-taker reasonably believed that he was not acting in contravention of the general prohibition by
making the agreement. 139
Communications made in breach of FSMA s.21(1) are called “unlawful communications”. Where an agreement, the making
or performance of which constitutes a controlled activity within FSMA s.21, has been made in consequence of an unlawful
communication, the agreement is unenforceable against a person who has entered into the agreement as a customer. In
addition, the customer can bring proceedings for the recovery of money and property transferred under the agreement. Similar
provisions apply where the customer has exercised rights conferred by a controlled investment in consequence of an unlawful
communication; in that case the obligations to which the customer has become subject in consequence of exercising the rights
are unenforceable. Where proceedings are taken, the court has a discretion to allow the agreement or obligations to be enforced

Proceedings covered in this title, UKBC-BULLENL 459371079 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
and money and property transferred under the agreement or obligation to be retained, if satisfied that it is just and equitable
in the circumstances of the case. In making that decision, the court must consider whether the applicant made any unlawful
communication by him reasonably believing that it was not an unlawful communication, and whether the applicant knew that
the agreement was entered into in consequence of an unlawful communication made by another person (as the case might be).
A party against whom an agreement is unenforceable must, if he elects not to perform the agreement, or recovers money or
property paid or transferred by him, repay any money and return any property transferred to him under the agreement. Where
property required to be returned has passed to a third party, references to it are treated as references to the value of the property
at the time when it was received by the person required to return it. 140
FSMA s.56(6) obliges an authorised person (A) to take reasonable care to ensure that no person performs a function in relation
to A’s regulated activity if that person has been prohibited from performing that function by an order made by the FCA or PRA
under s.56(2) on the ground that he is not a fit and proper person. Sections 59(1) and (2) require that A take reasonable care that
no person performs a controlled function of A for which that person has not been approved by the FCA or PRA, whether he
performs it under an arrangement made directly by A or under a contract with A to carry out regulated activities. Contraventions
of these sections, resulting in loss, are actionable by private persons 141  and in addition by a person who is not a private person,
where that person is acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity on behalf of a private person, any remedy is exclusively for
the benefit of that private person, and the remedy could not be otherwise obtained. 142  Any action is “subject to the defences
and other incidents applying to actions for breach of statutory duty.” 143
12-12
Section 138D(2) creates a statutory cause of action for contravention by an authorised person of a rule made by the FCA pursuant
to the Act, other than rules specified in s.138D(5) which include listing rules and rules requiring authorised persons to have or
maintain financial resources. The contravention is actionable “subject to the defences and other incidents applying to actions
for breach of statutory duty.” 144
The cause of action is available to private persons, and also to those who are not private persons, if any of the prescribed
conditions 145  apply. They are:
 
(i)the rule contravened is a rule preventing an authorised person from excluding or restricting any liability;
 
(ii)the rule contravened is directed at securing that transactions in securities or contractually based investments are not
effected with the benefit of unpublished information which is price-sensitive;
 
(iii)the action is brought at the suit of a person who is not a private person, acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity
on behalf of a private person, any remedy is exclusively for the benefit of that private person, and the remedy could not
be otherwise obtained;
 
(iv)the rule contravened requires an authorised person conducting insurance business 146  to respond to a claim for
compensation within a time limit, or to pay interest in specified circumstances.
It should be noted that under FSMA s.138D(3), the FCA can specify that rights of action are not available for certain rules.
Most sourcebooks or manuals in the FCA Handbook contain a Schedule 5, which states whether rights of action are available
in respect of the rules in the relevant sourcebook. The FCA’s rules are labelled “R” in the FCA Handbook. There is no right of
action available in respect of contraventions of evidential provisions (labelled “E”) or guidance (labelled “G”).
Rules made by the PRA are not actionable at the suit of a private person who suffers loss as a result of the contravention unless
the PRA so provides (FSMA s.138D(1)).
Contravention of a rule made by the FCA or PRA does not make a person guilty of an offence or (save in respect of certain
FCA rules) make any transaction void or unenforceable. 147
An offer to the public in the UK of new securities prior to the publication of a prospectus, if a prospectus is required by listing
rules made under s.84, is a contravention of s.85(1). Such a contravention is actionable at the suit of a person who suffers loss
“as a result of the contravention”. 148  There is no restriction to private persons.

Proceedings covered in this title, UKBC-BULLENL 459371079 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
The facts giving rise to proceedings for breach of statutory duty may also found a cause of action for breach of contract, for
negligence, or for breach of trust or fiduciary duty. The precedents set out below cover only causes of action created by FSMA.
Footnotes
128
The “overseas person” exclusion (i.e. one who carries on his relevant activities otherwise than from a permanent place
of business which he maintains in the UK) and the exclusion applying to an “information society service” (i.e. electronic
commerce: see the Council and EU Parliament directive 2000/31 of 8 June 2000 on electronic commerce [2000]
OJ L178/27) conducted from an EEA state other than the UK: Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Regulated
Activities) Order 2001 (SI 2001/544), arts 72, 72A. In addition, an individual who suffers loss in the course of insurance
business at Lloyd’s is not treated as suffering loss in the course of conducting a regulated activity.
129
The interpretation of the phrase “carrying out business of any kind” in Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Rights
of Action) Regulations 2001 (SI 2001/2256), art.3(1)(b) was considered in Titan Steel Wheels v Royal Bank of Scotland
Plc [2010] EWHC 211 (Comm); [2010] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 92. David Steel J considered that the phrase should be given
a wide interpretation.
130
FSMA s.26.
131
FSMA s.26(4)
132
FSMA s.20(3).
133
FSMA s.20(3).
134
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Rights of Action) Regulations 2001 (SI 2001/2256) art.4.
135
Under Pt 4A of FSMA.
136
A regulated activity designated as such by the Treasury by order (FSMA s.23(1B)).
137
FSMA s.20(2)(b).
138
FSMA s.27(1).
139
FSMA s.29.
140
FSMA s.30.
141
FSMA s.71.
142
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Rights of Action) Regulations 2001 (SI 2001/2256) art.5.
143
FSMA s.71(1) and (2).
144
FSMA s.138D(2).
145
Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Rights of Action) Regulations 2001 (SI 2001/2256) art.6.
146
With permission under Pt 4A of FSMA to effect or carry out insurance contracts, or to manage the underwriting capacity
of a Lloyd’s syndicate.
147
FSMA s.138E.
148
FSMA s.85(4).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
