Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Introduction
1-01
Each system of law requires a method of defining the dispute that is to be decided by the court. In the English common law
tradition this role was played by “pleadings”. This is a generic term to describe the formalised process by which each party states
its case prior to trial. The principles have been reformed from time to time, always in the context of some broader reform of
civil procedure. The first edition of this book, which was published in 1860, followed reforms introduced by the Common Law
Procedure Acts of 1852 and 1854. In 1897, the fifth edition included for the first time a chapter of “Introductory Observations”
which sought to explain the general principles of pleading. This followed the introduction of a system of “facts-based” pleadings
after the enactment of the Judicature Act 1875, itself a milestone of procedural reform. Hence, it became possible to formulate
certain overall principles which were not restricted to any particular type of dispute.
Reforms to the system of civil procedure have generally entailed a change in nomenclature, emphasising the desire of the
reformers to signal the need for a change of attitude. The reforms introduced by the Civil Procedure Rules 1998 (CPR), which
came into force on 26 April 1999, were no exception. When those Rules were debated in the House of Lords, the then Lord
Chancellor, Lord Irvine, explained that the aim had been to achieve greater simplicity and clarity. 1  An obvious example was
the abolition of the language of “pleadings” in favour of the more intelligible “statement of case” referred to in the CPR. 2
The term “statement of case” is used here rather than the word “pleading”, consistent with the language of the CPR. But it is fair
to say that the term “pleadings” is still frequently used by practitioners and judges alike, notwithstanding that some 20 years
have passed since the advent of the CPR. This partly reflects the fact that the traditional terminology has been adopted in many
countries, reflecting the underlying unity of approach in the common law world. This introductory chapter seeks to explain the
principles which apply to statements of case generally under the CPR.
Changes in procedural rules do not occur in isolation. They reflect and are influenced by changes in the economic cycle and
wider society. 3  Accordingly, from 1 April 2013 English civil procedure was again subject to a number of interlocking reforms,
largely implemented by the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, which resulted from a wide-ranging
review of the civil litigation costs system by Jackson LJ. 4  In his final report, Jackson LJ concluded that in some areas of civil
litigation costs were disproportionate and impeded access to justice. The resulting reforms impacted a number of areas of civil
procedure, including litigation funding, costs recovery and case management, with a renewed emphasis on the proportionality
and efficiency of civil litigation. As will be seen in this chapter, that emphasis on proportionality and efficiency feeds into how
practitioners should approach the treatment of statements of case under the CPR.
1-02
Part 1 of the CPR contains an overriding objective which, though amended, still encapsulates in many ways the spirit of the
Woolf Reforms in 1999. The overriding objective is to enable the court to deal with cases justly and at proportionate cost.
This is more than an abstraction, because the principle of proportionality means that doing justice precludes disproportionate
expenditure of time and money. 5
CPR r.1.1(2) provides a non-exhaustive list of factors that indicate what it means to deal with a case justly and at proportionate
cost, including ensuring that parties are on an equal footing, saving expense, dealing with cases in ways which are proportionate,
and ensuring that cases are dealt with expeditiously and fairly. That list was amended in 2013 following Jackson LJ’s
recommendations. CPR r.1.1(2)(e) now refers to “enforcing compliance with rules, practice directions and orders”, which was

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
intended to foster a culture of compliance and reflected the courts’ less-tolerant approach to delay and transgressions from the
CPR and court orders.
The Court of Appeal gave guidance as to the application of the overriding objective in the case of Morris v Bank of America
National Trust. 6
Morritt LJ stated at [48]:
“First and foremost, he [the judge] will have a duty of seeking to give effect to the overriding objective in CPR
1.1(1) … the judge is nevertheless under a duty to ensure, so far as practicable, that it is dealt with expeditiously
and fairly, and while allotting to it an appropriate share of the Court’s resources he must also take into account
the need to allot resources to other cases (see CPR 1.1(2)(d) and (e)).”
When applied in the present context, the overriding objective requires that statements of case play a proper part in achieving
a just result, and are not abused by the parties for tactical advantage. Equally, proportionality requires regard to be had to the
nature of the case concerned. The nature of lawsuits varies enormously, in size, subject matter and complexity, and there may be
huge disparities in the resources and expertise of those conducting them. The system has to be flexible enough to accommodate
all its users, 7  litigants-in-person as well as professional lawyers, 8  and what is acceptable in any particular instance depends
on the circumstances of the case itself.
Historical perspective
1-03
During the classical period of Roman law, 9  disputes were defined in the formula, which was “a written statement setting out
in brief language what was the exact issue between the parties.” 10  The formula comprised the instructions to the iudex (the
judge, who was a non-lawyer) detailing what facts he had to establish and how the case should be decided as a consequence.
An issue not in the formula could not be raised at the trial but, within that boundary, the iudex was judge of fact and law and
exercised a wide discretion.
English law 11  was much less sophisticated in its early days than classical Roman law. Ordeals of fire and water, wager of law
and judicial combat settled matters and required no pleadings. 12  However, in the twelfth century, the advent of the jury as a
more rational way of settling civil disputes brought pleadings with it. This was because, just as the Roman iudex had needed the
formula, the jury had to know what issues it had to decide. The pleadings served another function too because they disclosed
whether the issue was one of fact (for the jury) or one of law (for the judge).
Pleadings were conducted orally at the bar of the court and moderated by the judge until the fifteenth or sixteenth century. The
plaintiff first set out the facts of his complaint in what was known as the “declaration”, “narratio” or “count”. The plaintiff
would respond in what was known as the “replication”. The pleadings continued between the parties (called “rejoinder”, “sur-
rejoinder”, “rebutter” and “sur-rebutter”) until they came “to a point which is affirmed on one side and denied on the other, they
are then said to be at issue; all their debates being at last contracted into a single point, which must now be determined either
in favour of the plaintiff or of the defendant”. 13  It was not permissible to advance alternative causes of action or defences and
parties were obliged to maintain one single consistent line.
When the pleadings were complete, they were put on the “record”, after which the pleadings could not be amended and were
binding on the parties. Neither judge nor jury could consider any issue that was not in the pleadings. As a result, “tentative”
pleading was adopted, in which oral pleas could be advanced for discussion and then withdrawn if they did not meet judicial
favour.
Whilst the importance of oral pleading was, at that time, central, 14  they eventually gave way to written pleadings exchanged
between the parties. By the seventeenth century, however, written pleadings had become the subject of much criticism. 15  The
forms of action dominated pleading, as they always had, and the most minor defect in a pleading could ruin the pleader’s case.
Form was all.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
1-04
The nineteenth century saw a battle between rival schools of thought. Those in favour of the technicality of special pleading
succeeded in establishing the New Pleading Rules of Hilary Term 1834, which were known as the “Hilary Rules”. But Parliament
was soon pressed to pass the Common Law Procedure Act 1852, which required pleadings to omit immaterial statements and
actions and greatly reduced the technicalities that had blighted the system for so long. The Common Law Procedure Act 1854
also allowed juries to be dispensed with in civil cases for the first time. Writing in 1860, Bullen and Leake expressed the view
that “this branch of the law is now left in a state in which it will probably rest for some years to come.” That was not to be,
because the Judicature Acts 1873–1875 brought reforms on an even more fundamental scale. The basis of the modern English
judicial system was founded and, as part of this process, the rules of pleading were brought up to date.
Pleading in chancery had long been different from the common law pleading outlined above, but it had its own faults and
difficulties, not least in length. In the reformed system, law and equity were governed by the same rules for pleadings, which
were to be brief (as common law pleadings had been) and to contain facts not law (as equity pleadings had). 16  The terminology
of “statement of claim” and “defence” replaced the old names. Numbered paragraphing became required to set out “… as
concisely as may be a statement of the material facts on which the party pleading relies, but not the evidence by which they
are to be proved.” 17
These changes had their critics. In his foreword to the 12th edition of this book, Lord Denning referred to “the modern system
under which the pleader had only to state the material facts. This reform took away much of the incentive to accuracy and led
to much loose pleading and, worse still, to much loose thinking.” 18  It was, however, this system that remained in place, with
modifications, until 1999.
The Woolf reforms
1-05
On 28 March 1994, Lord Woolf, the then-Master of the Rolls and ultimate architect of the CPR, was appointed to review the
English rules of civil procedure with a view to: (i) improve access to justice and reduce the cost of litigation; (ii) reduce the
complexity of the rules and modernise terminology; and (iii) remove unnecessary distinctions between practice and procedure.
By the time Lord Woolf came to consider the reform of civil procedure, the imperfections in the way the pleadings system
operated were obvious. Although good pleading was valued—the ability succinctly to state a case remains an important indicator
of legal skill—tactical pleading, over-lengthy pleading, and the abuse of requests for further and better particulars all tended to
negative their utility in the effective and fair resolution of disputes.
Lord Woolf identified five main problems with pleadings under the old regime:
 
“a)they often fail to set out the facts clearly and so impede identification of the issues;
 
b)they concentrate too much on causes of action and defences, rather than on facts, which in turn contributes
to over-use of alternative positions; defences in particular are deliberately framed to keep all options open
as long as possible;
 
c)affirmative defences are not pleaded;
 
d)longwindedness; and
 
e)the original pleadings get out of date as they are superseded by amendments and further and better
particulars; after the exchange of witness statements, they become less relevant for the purpose of the trial
agenda.” 19
As he put it, “essentially, the problem is that the basic function of pleadings—to state succinctly the facts relied on—has been
lost sight of. The primacy of this requirement needs to be clearly restated.” 20  The problem stemmed not so much from the

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
provisions of the old rules, more from the fact that the provisions were often ignored. Lord Woolf’s view was that the word
“pleadings” had “acquired an unfortunate flavour of obfuscation rather than clarity” 21  and that “[t]his is an instance where
a change of language will, I believe, help to underpin a change of attitude and a real change of practice to a more open and
straightforward method of stating a claim or defence.” 22
1-06
Lord Woolf recommended wide-ranging reform in his Access to Justice Final Report, which culminated in the adoption of the
CPR, albeit the reform of the rules governing pleadings formed a comparatively small part of the overall package.
As explained later, the rules governing statements of case under the CPR (in Pt 16 and PD 16) are less prescriptive than those
contained in their predecessor, Order 18 of the Rules of the Supreme Court. In his original proposals, Lord Woolf made a
number of recommendations, which (after consultation) he did not pursue in his final Report. 23  Leaving aside the change of
attitude he wanted to encourage, the editors of Civil Procedure 2000 identified three main differences between the old regime
and the present CPR.
 
(a)“Statements of case must be verified by a statement of truth.
 
(b)A defence must provide a comprehensive response to the particulars of claim; a simple denial of an allegation will not
suffice.
 
(c)The defence of tender before action (which has been renamed ‘tender before claim’) is available in response to claims
for damages as well as debts.”
Another major aspect of the CPR was the unification of the vast majority of rules for the High Court and county court.
Whilst the changes effected by the CPR were wide-ranging, the immediate purpose of pleadings remained largely the same.
Reference has already been made to the landmark Judicature Acts of 1873–1875, which provided the foundation for the modern
English legal system. The rules of court of 1875 contained provisions on pleadings intended to implement the new order, and at
the time constituted a radical reform. Then, as now, the judiciary was anxious for the spirit as well as the letter of the new rules to
be adhered to. Thus, in one early judgment, Jessel MR refused to permit the defendant to maintain an evasive defence. He said:
“The whole object of pleadings is to bring the parties to an issue, and the meaning of the rules … was to prevent
the issue being enlarged, which would prevent either party from knowing when the cause came on for trial, what
the real point to be discussed and decided was. In fact, the whole meaning of the system is to narrow the parties to
definite issues, and thereby to diminish expense and delay, especially as regards the amount of testimony required
on either side at the hearing.” 24
Those comments are not dissimilar to Lord Hoffmann’s remarks, following the introduction of the CPR, in Barclays Bank v
Boulter. There he said that “the purpose of pleadings is to define the issues and give the other party fair notice of the case
which he has to meet”. 25  That case was decided under the old rules. But Lord Hoffmann’s comments also reflect the essential
purpose of a statement of case. Other considerations identified shortly following the introduction of the CPR included setting
the limits of the action and providing a record of the ambit of the dispute (for the purposes, for example, of res judicata and
issue estoppel). 26  The statement of case is also central to efficient case management, and in the pre-trial process generally. As
Lord Woolf said, “the pleadings will help the court to determine the range and scale of material required to progress the case
and the extent of discovery, witness statements and the use of experts.” 27  They also play an important part in settlement, since
both parties must know the scope of the dispute which it is proposed to settle. 28

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
5
Comparative perspective
European Court of Justice
1-07
On 25 September 2012, the European Court of Justice (ECJ) (but hereafter referred to as the Court of Justice of the European
Union (CJEU)) adopted new Rules of Procedure, which entered into force on 1 November 2012, targeted at ensuring that the
court’s procedure reflected changes in its case load and, in particular, the increasing number of references for preliminary
rulings made by the courts and tribunals of EU Member States. The Rules of Procedure are supplemented by Practice
Directions adopted on 25 November 2013.
The pleadings in a direct action, that is, an action commenced in the CJEU 29  as opposed to those referred by a national
court, consist of an application, a defence, a reply and a rejoinder. A defendant cannot file a rejoinder unless the applicant
has filed a reply. The application should deal with (amongst other things) the subject matter of the proceedings and the pleas
in law (moyens) on which the application is based, the form of the order sought by the applicant, supporting evidence and
accompanying documents.
The arguments are set out in full. 30  The defence, which may include a related counterclaim, must conform to a similar set
of requirements.
The pleadings perform the same basic function as English statements of case but are more important in the sense that oral
advocacy is extremely limited, being, according to one commentator, “little more than an adjunct to the written pleadings”. 31
The subordinate nature of oral submissions is apparent from the court’s 2013 Practice Directions. Part III deals with the
oral part of the procedure and makes clear that hearings are not required as a matter of course. Paragraph 45 provides that
the decisive criterion for holding a hearing is not whether an express request has been made, but rather the court’s own
assessment of the potential contribution of an oral hearing to the outcome of the dispute or to determining the answers to
questions referred by a member state court or tribunal. Paragraph 50 likewise clarifies that the purposes of oral submissions
are twofold. First to respond to any requests to concentrate on specified issues in the submissions and to answer questions put
to parties or interested persons by the court. Secondly to draw attention to points of particular importance, having regard to
the written observations submitted by other participants. Both purposes demonstrate that oral advocacy is avowedly ancillary
to the participants’ written submissions.
1-08
This has obvious consequences:
“It [the application] is much more [than English particulars of claim], for it contains, in effect, the whole of
the applicant’s case. It should include a full statement of the facts, of the nature of the complaint, and of the
arguments of law upon which the applicant relies; any documentary evidence must be annexed (or its exact
whereabouts indicated so as to permit a subsequent court order for production). Moreover, since the form of
order sought cannot normally be amended, and since the court cannot adjudicate ultra petita, the contents of
the application circumscribe the scope of the action. The case can be expanded in the reply to the defence or at
the oral hearing, but no substantial modification is permitted at these later stages.” 32
And again:
“The Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance require the subject-matter of the proceedings and the
pleas raised to be stated clearly and precisely in order that the defendant may prepare its defence and the
court give judgment without having to give further particulars. In order to secure legal certainty and the sound
administration of justice, the essential facts and law on which the application is based must be set out … in the
text of the application itself in a coherent and comprehensible manner. If the application fails to provide details

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
6
of the underlying facts and circumstances, it will be inadmissible on the ground that the court is unable to rule
on it. The text of the application may be further elucidated by references to passages in documents appended
to it, but a general reference to such documents cannot constitute a statement of the essential facts and law on
which the action is based. However, information may not be provided at the hearing in order to fill gaps in the
application. The degree of precision required of an application varies from case to case.” 33
The CJEU strictly confines parties to their pleadings. The CJEU has held that “… the parties are to state the subject-matter of
the dispute in the document instituting the proceedings … a party may not alter the actual subject matter of the dispute during
the proceedings.” 34  That decision was made by reference to art.38 of the old (pre-2012) Rules of Procedure, but art.120
of the current Rules is drafted in similar terms. It is also a clear rule that new pleas not raised in the application or defence
cannot be raised at any later time in the proceedings unless they are based on law or facts that have only come to light in the
course of the proceedings. 35  This has led Lenaerts and Arts to comment:
“… the applicant is entitled to raise additional arguments in the reply in support of pleas raised in the application.
This means that the Court will often have to make a subtle distinction between a new plea and a new argument.
In addition, the applicant may clarify in the reply the factual basis on which its pleas are based. Obviously,
however, the applicant may ‘clarify’ only pleas which have already been raised in the application.” 36
1-09
In the case of preliminary references brought under art.267 TFEU (formerly art.234 EC), the national court itself files the
request for a preliminary ruling to the CJEU. This should set out sufficient factual and legal detail for the court and interested
parties to understand the background to the request in the main proceedings. 37  It has been stated that:
“In many cases the parties (and the court) will prefer to collaborate in the preparation of a statement of case.
By taking that course, the parties are able to ensure that complex matters of fact are accurately stated and that
their own legal arguments are summarised in terms which correspond with the way they intend to develop them
before the European Court.” 38
Pleadings do not exist in the same way in preliminary ruling proceedings. Following the reference, there is an opportunity
for certain interested parties to file written observations with the court. 39  These should include the title of the action;
an explanation of the facts and circumstances giving rise to the reference; submissions on the questions referred; and
recommendations on the form of the answer to be given to the referring court. The written observations should contain a
full and authoritative statement of the relevant arguments of law and fact. Their purpose is to suggest the answer(s) the court
should come to and set out the reasoning behind such answer(s). As a general rule, these written observations will take up
most of the time advocates spend on a case before the European Court. 40  Observations are the final formal written stage
of the procedure. 41
There is also a very different approach to the role of the written observations and the hearing: the participants are not prevented
from raising new points at the hearing, in that this may be the only time at which it is possible to comment on matters raised
by other parties in their observations. 42
Australia
1-10
Pleadings in Australia consist of a statement of claim, defence and reply; there can also be a counterclaim, defence to
counterclaim and reply to that defence. The system requires little explanation as it is close to the pre-CPR English procedure.
As Cairns puts it:
“The same system was later introduced into the Australian jurisdictions. The system of pleading initiated by
the Judicature Act 1875 is still in force, although with some modifications. Supreme courts in the Australian

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
7
States and Territories are courts of unlimited jurisdiction. Their rules adopt the procedural concepts of the 1883
revision of the English rules of 1875.” 43
The basic rule is that pleadings are binding on the parties at trial. 44  Within that framework, the Australian courts have laid
down some valuable statements of principle. In Gould v Mount Oxide Mines Ltd, Isaacs and Rich JJ said:
“Undoubtedly, as a general rule of fair play, and one resting on the fundamental principle that no man ought
to be put to loss without having a proper opportunity of meeting the case against him, pleadings should state
with sufficient clearness the case of the party whose averments they are. That is their function. Their function
is discharged when the case is presented with reasonable clearness. Any want of clearness can be cured by
amendment or particulars. But pleadings are only a means to an end, and if the parties in fighting their legal
battles choose to restrict them, or to enlarge them, or to disregard them and meet each other on issues fairly
fought out, it is impossible for them to hark back to the pleadings and treat them as governing the area of contest.
… There are qualifications, no doubt, and each case must depend for the proper application of the principle
upon its own facts.” 45
The High Court of Australia developed this theme in Dare v Pulham. 46
Millhouse J stated the contemporary position as follows in the Supreme Court of South Australia (Full Court):
“Pleadings in an action are to define the issues between the parties. Sometimes—perhaps this is one of those
times—the pleadings may not do so at all or only imperfectly. As a rule, though, depending on the course of
the hearing, that may not matter because the issues become quite plain as the hearing proceeds and no party
is put at a disadvantage. That, I think, was so here. The day has well passed when decisions are based on the
state of the pleadings, irrespective of the facts or justice.” 47
1-11
Insofar as the English courts’ approach is to consider substance over form, this statement of the law is not far divorced from
the position adopted under the English CPR. Thus, in Westbrook Resources Ltd v Globe Metallurgical Inc, 48  Moore-Bick
LJ, giving the leading judgment on appeal, observed that, whilst there will be some cases where failure to raise an issue in the
statement of case will entail that the party is prevented from raising it at trial, the overriding object is to do justice between the
parties. Form should not triumph over substance. 49  But that will not be the case where defective pleadings lead to inefficient
case management, unnecessary disagreements between the parties, and potential prejudice at trial. As the Court of Appeal
put it in stark terms in The Prudential Assurance Company Ltd v Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs
(overruled on appeal, but not on this point) 50 :
 
“22… it soon became clear that the lack of pleadings meant that the parties disagreed about what was the
scope of the trial; what were the issues that the judge had to decide; whether points had or had not been
raised; whether or not they could be raised on appeal; and even what the judge had decided. This is no way
to conduct litigation involving millions of pounds. We were told that this unacceptably cavalier approach
to pleadings was a common feature of this kind of litigation. It must stop.
 
23.In our procedural law a trial is intended to be the final resolution of all matters in dispute between the
parties. Although a party who is dissatisfied with the outcome of a trial may appeal to this court (usually
with permission) the appellate process is, in general, limited to a review of the first instance decision. It is
thus the starting point that parties are expected to put before the trial judge all questions both of fact and
of law upon which they wish to have an adjudication.”

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
8
New Zealand
1-12
Pleadings in New Zealand comprise a statement of claim, a statement of defence and a reply. Counterclaims are, of course,
also possible, and there is scope for further particulars. The Court of Appeal of New Zealand laid down the general approach
in Hopper Group Ltd v Parker, where Bisson J said:
“One essential part of pleadings is to state precisely the basic facts on which the plaintiff relies so as to clearly
define the issues which the defendant has to meet. If that is not done, it is difficult for a defendant to prepare for
trial and questions such as payment into Court or offers of settlement can hardly be considered. Furthermore,
if the case goes to trial without precise pleadings, much time can be wasted and a defendant might be taken by
surprise when the real issue not previously stated clearly suddenly emerges.” 51
Rules 5.25 to 5.35 of the New Zealand High Court Rules 2016 (LI 2016/225) set out what needs to be included in a statement
of claim. Rule 5.26 provides that the statement of claim must show, inter alia, the general nature of the plaintiff’s claim to the
relief sought, together with sufficient particulars of time, place, amounts, names of persons, nature and dates of instruments,
and other circumstances, to inform the court and the parties against whom relief is sought of the plaintiff’s cause of action.
Sub-parts 4, 10, 11 and 12 of the High Court Rules make further provision for general pleading points, statements of defence
and appearance, counterclaims and replies respectively.
As a general rule, law and evidence should not be pleaded. But the interests of justice and need for clarity are paramount
so points of law may sometimes be pleaded. 52  It is also clear that, “the modern approach is to avoid trial by ambush, time
wasting by adjournments, and aborted hearings caused by surprise” 53 ; an approach that is very much consistent with the
overarching objective of the Rules, expressed in r.1.2, to “secure the just, speedy, and inexpensive determination of any
proceeding or interlocutory application”.
United States of America (Federal Procedure)
1-13
Before 1938, the federal courts in the US sat either as courts of equity or as courts of law. There was a uniform procedure
for equity cases created by the Equity Rules 1912: in actions at law, the court applied the procedure of the state in which it
sat. This unsatisfactory position led Congress to pass the Rules Enabling Act 1934 which empowered the Supreme Court to
lay down a uniform procedural code for the federal courts. The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure were promulgated in 1937,
and effective from 16 September 1938. They are still in force, albeit with significant amendments. The most recent iteration
is effective from 1 December 2018. Rules 7 to 16 govern pleadings. Rule 7(a) provides that the pleadings allowed are the
complaint, answer, reply to counterclaim denominated as such, answer to crossclaim (if the answer contains a crossclaim),
third-party complaint and third-party answer, and, if the court orders one, a reply to an answer.
Rule 8 is the pivotal rule on general rules of pleading. Rule 8(a) is headed “Claims for Relief” and provides that they:
“… must contain: (1) a short and plain statement of the grounds for the court’s jurisdiction, unless the court
already has jurisdiction and the claim needs no new jurisdictional support; (2) a short and plain statement of the
claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief; and (3) a demand for the relief sought, which may include
relief in the alternative and different types of relief.”
In practice, “US complaints often contain substantially more factual and legal detail than English writs or most notices
of arbitration, but somewhat less information than a fully pleaded statement of claim. The plaintiff will ordinarily have
considerable latitude (subject to judicial approval) in amending his complaint during the course of litigation.” 54
Rule 8(b) deals with “Defenses; Admissions and Denials”:

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
9
“(1) In responding to a pleading, a party must: (A) state in short and plain terms its defenses to each claim
asserted against it; and (B) admit or deny the allegations asserted against it by an opposing party”.
Rule 8(b)(2)–(6) then makes further provision for general and specific denials (including the general principle that a denial
“must fairly respond to the substance of the allegation”), part denials, denials resulting from a lack of knowledge or
information and the effect of a failure to deny. This final point is important. By r.8(6), an allegation other than one relating
to damages quantum will be taken to be admitted if a responsive pleading is required but the allegation is not denied.
Rule 8(d), the terms of which are consistent with the modern approach to pleading espoused in the CPR, is headed (inter
alia) “Pleading to be Concise and Direct” and provides:
“(1) Each allegation must be simple, concise, and direct. No technical form is required.”
1-14
The US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit has held that “the clear purpose of the rule [namely, Rule 8(d)(1)] is to give
notice to the other party and not to formulate issues or fully summarise the facts involved”. 55  Thus, the pleadings initiate
litigation but only begin to set the ambit of the dispute. 56
Various further requirements are set down by r.9, “Pleading Special Matters”, and r.10 “Form of Pleadings”. Rule 11(b)
requires an attorney to investigate various matters relating to the basis of a pleading before filing it.
Heightened pleading requirements are required in some types of action by Statute, for example, Title I of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 (as amended) (78 et seq.), requires a plaintiff to “state with particularity facts giving rise to a strong
inference that the defendant acted with the required state of mind.” 57  Further, s.21(D)(9)(b)(1) of the amended Act states:
“the complaint shall specify each statement alleged to have been misleading, the reason or reasons why the
statement is misleading, and, if an allegation regarding the statement or omission is made on information or
belief, the complaint shall state with particularity all facts on which that belief is formed.”
While the American system grew out of the English pleadings system, it is clear that in its modern form it is different from
fact-based pleading. The purpose of pleadings in the federal courts is to give fair notice to the other party. Although they
play a part in fixing the boundaries of the action, 58  it is not to the same extent as statements of case under English civil
procedure. But James, Hazard and Leubsdorf have noted that: “dissatisfaction with the heavy costs that discovery entails has
led to resurrection of pleading as a device for formulating issues, at least in certain types of case.” 59
Statements of case
The importance of statements of case
1-15
The importance of statements of case has been reiterated by the judiciary on numerous occasions. Shortly after the introduction
of the CPR, in McPhilemy v Times Newspapers Ltd, 60  Lord Woolf MR took the opportunity to explain how statements of
case should function. He made a number of points, some by reference to the case under appeal:
“… undoubtedly considerable time, energy and money have been incurred in producing those pleadings and
the question that arises is whether this scale of expenditure is necessary or desirable. An indication of the scale
is provided by the fact that the reply is already in a reamended form …

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
10
“The need for extensive pleadings including particulars should be reduced by the requirement that witness
statements are now exchanged. In the majority of proceedings identification of the documents upon which a
party relies, together with copies of that party’s witness statements, will make the detail of the nature of the
case the other side has to meet obvious. This reduces the need for particulars in order to avoid being taken by
surprise. This does not mean that pleadings are now superfluous. Pleadings are still required to mark out the
parameters of the case that is being advanced by each party. In particular they are still critical to identify the
issues and the extent of the dispute between the parties. What is important is that the pleadings should make
clear the general nature of the case of the pleader. This is true both under the old rules and the new rules.” 61
Two points follow from this. The first is that the statement of case defines the ambit of the dispute. The second is a practical
one: quite apart from the inherent desirability of conciseness, the practical need for extensive detail in statements of case
has been reduced by the practice of exchanging witness statements. Each side knows in advance the nature of the factual
testimony that will be adduced by the other side. In theory, this should enable statements of case to revert to their original
function, namely the concise identification of the issues: “They need not, and should not, contain the evidence by which they
are to be proved or the opposing party’s pleadings or admissions.” 62
In Al-Medenni v Mars UK Ltd, 63  Dyson LJ emphasised the precise importance of statements of case. He stated:
“It is fundamental to our adversarial system of justice that the parties should clearly identify the issues that arise
in the litigation, so that each has the opportunity of responding to the points made by the other. The function of
the judge is to adjudicate on those issues alone. The parties may have their own reasons for limiting the issues
or presenting them in a certain way. The judge can invite, and even encourage, the parties to recast or modify
the issues. But if they refuse to do so, the judge must respect that decision. One consequence of this may be
that the judge is compelled to reject a claim on the basis on which it is advanced, although he or she is of the
opinion that it would have succeeded if it had been advanced on a different basis. Such an outcome may be
unattractive, but any other approach leads to uncertainty and potentially real unfairness.”
1-16
More recently, the Court of Appeal deprecated what it described as an “unacceptably cavalier approach to pleadings” in
Prudential Assurance Co Ltd, linking the drafting of statements of case to the efficacy of the trial and appellate process. 64
The purpose of statements of case—a document intended to facilitate the court and the parties to define the issues in the case
—also underpins the court’s repeated complaints about the length, imprecision and prolixity of statements of case drafted by
practitioners. Thus, in each of Standard Bank Plc v Via Mat International Ltd and Hague Plant Ltd v Hague, 65  the Court of
Appeal registered its concerns about “overlong pleadings and written submissions” and “documents … of interminable length
and diffuseness and conspicuous lack of precision”. In the latter case, Christopher Clarke LJ noted (at [78]) that “pleadings
are intended to help the Court and the parties … [i]t is time, in this field, to get back to basics”.
In Tchenguiz v Grant Thornton UK LLP, 66  Leggatt J felt compelled to strike out on his own initiative a 94-page pleading in
the Commercial Court (for which prospective permission had not been sought), stating (at [1]):
“Statements of case must be concise. They must plead only material facts, meaning those necessary for the
purpose of formulating a cause of action or defence, and not background facts or evidence. Still less should
they contain arguments, reasons or rhetoric. These basic rules were developed long ago and have stood the test
of time because they serve the vital purpose of identifying the matters which each party will need to prove by
evidence at trial.”
The sanction rightly applied by the judge shows that this warning should be heeded. It is not without significance that Leggatt
J, in striking out the claimants’ particulars of claim, observed that he had shown a draft of his judgment to the judge in charge
of the Commercial List, who had endorsed the principle that “flagrant disregard of the guidance applicable to statements of
case may lead to adverse costs orders”. 67

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
11
Citing old case law
1-17
Something must briefly be said of authorities that pre-dated the CPR, the relevance of which is, even now, put in issue from
time-to-time. In Biguzzi v Rank Leisure Plc, 68  Lord Woolf MR made it clear that earlier authorities are no longer generally
of any relevance in considering the effect of the CPR. The court will rarely concern itself with authority as to the operation
of equivalent provisions under the Rules of the Supreme Court. To do so would be counter-productive to the position of the
CPR, which was intended to be a new procedural code. But distinguished academic commentary had taken a different view
from the outset of the CPR. 69  For example, one commentator in particular noted that:
“It would be absurd to pretend that on the day the CPR came into force the rich learning of the past lost all
value. It would be futile to insist that sensible solutions fashioned by judges over many generations must now
be overlooked … The old authority will have persuasive authority wherever the context allows.” 70
The above cautionary observations have been reflected in authority, 71  and a balance achieved. Nevertheless, where
appropriate, the introduction of a new code is a valuable opportunity to escape from the unnecessary accretion of authority.
In those areas where the underlying principles have fundamentally changed, for example, the effect of a failure to formulate
the cause of action in the statement of case, decisions should be determined exclusively by reference to the CPR.
Stating facts which give rise to a valid legal claim or defence
1-18
The statement of case must state facts which, if correct, give rise to a valid legal claim or defence. If it does not do so, it is
liable to be struck out. The development of the rules in this regard throws light on the changing notion of the function of
pleadings. Prior to 1875, objections on this ground were raised by way of demurrer, the sole question being whether the cause
of action, defence or answer was good in point of law. 72  Under the Rules of the Supreme Court, the test was different, namely
whether the pleading concerned disclosed a reasonable cause of action or defence. Under the CPR, the court’s power to strike
out a statement of case is conferred by CPR r.3.4, which is one of a number of rules conferring powers on the court to manage
cases in accordance with the overriding objective. The court may strike out a statement of case which discloses no reasonable
grounds for bringing or defending a claim. 73  Cases which are unwinnable, 74  obviously ill-founded and other cases which
do not amount to a legally-recognisable claim or defence may be struck out under this rule. 75  That r.3.4 comprises part of
the court’s case-management powers under CPR Pt 3 is important. It signifies that the adequacy of the pleading is a matter
with which the court will concern itself, even if not the subject of a specific application by one of the parties, and the court
may make an order of its own initiative. In defining the court’s duty to manage cases, CPR r.1.4(2)(b) provides that active
case management includes identifying the issues at an early stage.
Under the old rules, no evidence was admissible on such an application, requiring the court to determine the issue by reference
to the pleading alone. This restriction is not included in r.3.4, indicating, for example, that the contents of a witness statement
can be taken into account in determining the result. 76
In practice, where there is potentially a good cause of action which is not pleaded, the matter is usually dealt with by way
of amendment. Furthermore, the power to strike out under the CPR is explicitly linked in the accompanying PD 3A with
CPR r.24.2, 77  which enables the court to give summary judgment against a claimant or defendant where that party has no
real prospect of succeeding on his claim or defence. Indeed, it is not uncommon for a strike-out application to be advanced
concurrently with an application for summary judgment under CPR r.24.2. PD 3A para.1.4 gives examples of the types of
situation within r.3.4(2)(a) as applied to particulars of claim. These are cases where the particulars of claim do not indicate
what the claim is about, or are incoherent and make no sense, or those which contain a coherent set of facts but those facts, even
if true, do not disclose any recognisable legal claim against the defendant. 78  Similar provisions apply as regards defences.
It follows that it remains the rule that a party must produce a statement of case which discloses a cause of action, or defence,

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
12
as the case may be. This is reflected in the White Book commentary: “The Claimant should state all the facts necessary for
the purpose of formulating a complete cause of action.” 79  The sanction to be applied, on the other hand, depends on the
circumstances. Alternatives other than striking out will be adopted if necessary to produce a just result. These include orders
as to costs, and limiting or increasing the award of interest, and ordering money to be paid into court. 80
Sanctions
1-19
As mentioned above, the overriding objective now expressly contemplates enforcing compliance with rules, practice
directions and orders. 81  Further, the CPR gives the procedural judge 82  wide powers to “specify the consequence of a failure
to comply with [an] order or a condition” (r.3.1(3)(b)). As regards statements of case, the power to strike it out in whole
or in part remains the most draconian sanction. The court may exercise that power where the statement of case fails to
disclose reasonable grounds for bringing or defending the claim, or is an abuse of process, or where there has been a failure
to comply with a rule, Practice Direction or court order (see r.3.4 discussed above). However, in the past such applications
have sometimes led to undesirable “satellite” litigation. In Biguzzi v Rank Leisure Plc, 83  Lord Woolf MR emphasised that
striking out is not always appropriate. He drew attention to the numerous alternatives available, including costs (if necessary,
on the indemnity basis), ordering a party to pay money into court and varying the rate of interest payable on costs or any
final award of damages. 84
Striking out and the ECHR
1-20
The right of access to a court under art.6(1) of the ECHR may require a degree of caution from a court in exercising its
strike out power. This is particularly the case where striking out would exclude entire categories of claims or confer blanket
immunity from civil liability. 85  The courts, however, have adopted the view that because art.6(1) only applies to “genuine
and serious” disputes about civil rights and obligations it does not prevent the striking out of claims in suitable cases.
Lord Woolf stated in Kent v Griffiths 86 :
“It would be wrong for the Osman decision to be taken on a signal that, even when the legal position is clear
and in investigation of the facts would provide us assurance, the courts should be reluctant to dismiss cases
which have no real prospect of success. Courts are now encouraged where an issue or issues can be identified
which will help resolve litigation to take that issue or those issues at an early stage of the proceedings so as
to achieve expedition and save expense. There is no question of any contravention of Article 6(1) in so doing.
Defendants as well as claimants are entitled to a fast trial and it is an important point of the case management
function to bring proceedings to an end as expeditiously as possible.”
Case management and statements of case
1-21
The CPR envisage active case management by the courts, including the close monitoring of proceedings. Under CPR
r.1.4(1), the court is required to further the overriding objective by actively managing cases, which, by CPR r.1.4(2), includes
identifying the issues at an early stage, deciding promptly which issues need full investigation and trial and accordingly
summarily disposing of others, and deciding the order in which issues are to be resolved. This was a key feature of the civil
justice reforms, with case-management receiving renewed attention following Jackson LJ’s review of English civil procedure.
The principle of case management underlies the CPR. As Sir Ross Cranston has observed, it was intended that, under the
new rules:

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
13
“The courts through new mechanisms and the work of the procedural judges would decide what procedure
was suitable for each case, set realistic timetables and ensure compliance. The objective would be to define
the issues and to encourage the settlement of cases at the earliest stage. A less combative approach would be
required of the parties and those who did not behave reasonably would be penalised. If settlement was not
achieved, court control would ensure that a case was tried as quickly and as economically as could be … [T]he
court should create among lawyers the expectation that events will occur as ordered and when scheduled.” 87
The case management conference is a key component of active case-management. Indeed, such is its importance in the
commercial context that, in Richardson v Glencore UK Ltd, 88  the court rebuked the parties for their apparent casualness in
seeking to vacate the case management conference at very late notice by an informal letter emailed to the court listing officer,
noting, “… this letter demonstrated a failure on the part of all concerned to appreciate the role and importance of the case
management conference. It also demonstrated a failure to comply with the special provision made for case management in
the Commercial Court by CPR 58.13, Practice Direction 58, and the Admiralty and Commercial Court Guide”.
As stated, the adequacy of a statement of case is a matter with which the court will concern itself even if it is not the subject
of a specific application by one of the parties. Lord Woolf said that, as part of its responsibility for managing cases, the court
should ensure that the parties plainly state the factual ingredients of their case so that the nature and scope of the dispute can
be identified. 89  The editors of the White Book state:
“A major objective of case management under the CPR is to ensure that statements of case do indeed set out the
parties’ case and define the dispute between them. The rules as to the contents of statements of case have been
made simpler and they are now subject to “judicial scrutiny” at an early stage. As part of its responsibility for
managing cases, the court will ensure that the parties plainly state the factual ingredients of their case so that the
true nature and the scope of the dispute can be identified. The particulars of claim and defence are considered
by the procedural judge and, if the issues cannot be readily identified from statements of case, directions are
given to rectify this.” 90
In defining the court’s duty to manage cases, r.1.4(2)(b) specifies that active case management includes identifying the issues
at an early stage. 91  A function of the case management conference is to make sure that, so far as possible this is done in
the statements of case, and (for example in the Commercial Court) by way of aids such as the case memorandum and list of
common ground and issues, both of which must be included in the case management bundle. 92
The statement of case as a parameter
1-22
As indicated by the Court of Appeal in Prudential Assurance Co Ltd, statements of case are an important tool in producing
a trial which is both fair and manageable. A similar point was made by Tomlinson LJ in Skyzynski v Metropolitan Police, 93
in which he noted that “they are essential for the fair trial of an action and the saving of time at trial”. Under the old rules,
parties were, in principle, held to their pleadings. They “set the limits of the action which may not be extended without due
amendment properly made”. 94  In relation to this principle, Scrutton LJ has said:
“Cases must be decided on the issues on the record; and if it is desired to raise other issues they must be placed
on the record by amendment. In the present case the issue on which the judge decided was raised by himself
without amending the pleadings, and in my opinion he was not entitled to take such a course.” 95
In a more recent statement of practice, it was said:
“… it appears to me that the court must have jurisdiction to grant any relief that it thinks appropriate to the
facts as approved; but if a party seeks to raise a new claim, which has not been adumbrated in his pleading,

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
14
in the course of trial, in my opinion the court should not give relief of that kind, at any rate without offering
the opposing party an opportunity for an adjournment, and giving them an opportunity to say whether they
have been taken by surprise, or have been prejudiced by the fact that that particular form of relief has not been
explicitly claimed earlier.” 96
There is no explicit provision in the CPR that a party’s case must be reflected in his pleadings. However, the principles
identified above still apply and, when the right of a party to argue a particular point at trial is contested, the point of reference is
how he has formulated his statement of case. 97  If a party wishes to raise a new and distinct claim, his statement of case should
be amended appropriately (the provisions applicable to amendments are set out in CPR Pt 17 98 ). In applying these principles
under the CPR, the court will have regard to the overriding objective of dealing with the case justly and at proportionate cost
(r.1.1). That objective will, for instance, determine whether a party is granted or refused leave to add a new ground of claim
to his case, or conversely whether the court takes the view that there is no need for a formal amendment since the nature of
the claim is already clear to the other side. 99
It is to be noted that it has been held that an issue of fact which is dependent on evidence cannot be decided by the trial
judge unless it is set out in a statement of case. It is not sufficient that it was raised in correspondence after service of the
statements of case. 100
The onus is on the relevant party to seek to amend its statement of case if it wishes to advance a previously unpleaded point. 101
Further, an allegation which is not included in a statement of case cannot provide a sustainable ground for appeal. 102
Statements of case should not, however, be used to set out issues that are only of relevance to a costs dispute between the
parties. 103
Statements of truth
1-23
Statements of case must be verified as to their factual content by or on behalf of the party concerned. Verification is by
a “statement of truth” (r.22.1(1)(a)), 104  signed either by the party or their legal representative. 105  A legal representative
verifies only that he has his client’s authority to sign on his behalf; he does not himself verify the contents of the document.
There are particular provisions in CPR PD 22 supplementing Pt 22 for cases in which the party verifying a document by a
statement of truth is a company 106  or a partnership. 107  A statement of case without a statement of truth is not a nullity. It
remains effective, but is liable to be struck out, either of the court’s own initiative or upon an application (r.22.2). Neither
can such a statement be relied on as evidence of any of the matters it sets out (r.22.1(b)).
Part 22 contains the requirements as to verifying witness statements, as well as statements of case. In practice, witness
statements are used in many circumstances in which affidavits were formerly used. 108  As the White Book points out, the
justification for the requirement that a witness statement should be verified is obvious. As regards statements of case, there
are two reasons for requiring verification:
“First, if a party is required to certify his belief in the accuracy and truth of the matters put forward, the statement
of case is less likely to include assertions that are speculative and fanciful and designed to obfuscate. 109
Secondly, in certain circumstances, a statement of case may be relied on as evidence. If it is to be used as such
it is right that the facts asserted in it should be verified. To an extent, the pleader’s scope for prevarication
and obfuscation, and for pleading alternative positions that may come perilously close to flat contradictions,
is restricted by the verification requirement.” 110
Essentially, the purpose of the statement of truth is to eliminate claims where the party has no honest belief in the case and
further to discourage claims that are not supported by evidence and which are brought in the hope that some evidence may
be forthcoming at disclosure or trial. 111  The requirement also has the effect of tying a party to the facts he has pleaded.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
15
Each party is encouraged to set out his definitive case from the outset, rather than prevaricate first and amend later. If a party
subsequently seeks to amend his claim in a manner which involves setting out a factual case which is inconsistent with that
originally pleaded, he faces a risk (at least) of damaging his credibility, and (at worst) of liability for contempt of court. Rule
32.14(1) 112  provides that:
“Proceedings for contempt of court may be brought against a person if he makes, or causes to be made, a false
statement in a document verified by a statement of truth without an honest belief in its truth.”
As the passage cited above from the White Book shows, the statement of truth has the additional advantage that a verified
statement of case may of itself stand as evidence (at hearings other than trial). 113  For example, the claimant may choose
to rely on his particulars of claim in an application for summary judgment without needing to serve additional evidence by
way of a witness statement.
A unified claim that sets out contradictory facts is not permitted under the CPR as, in such circumstances, the party signing
the statement of truth will be unable to do so honestly. 114  The Court of Appeal has however held 115  that nothing in CPR
Pt 22 excludes the possibility of pleading factual alternatives, especially in cases where the alternative was raised by the
defendant’s own case. While the claimant’s primary case was not an assertion of the truth of his opponent’s account, if the
court found his opponent’s account to be true the claimant would seek to rely on it as an alternative basis for liability. In
Binks, the Court of Appeal also countenanced the possibility of a caveated statement of truth. 116
The general requirement for a statement of truth should also have the practical effect of focusing the minds of litigants on
the factual allegations that are being put forward on their behalf. As regards drafting statements of case, the rule has always
been that statements of fact should not be included in pleadings which are not supported by the client’s instructions. 117
Relationship with other trial documents
1-24
As indicated earlier, over time, the role of pleadings and now statements of case as an exclusive means of giving a party
notice of the case he has to meet has disappeared. Exchange of witness statements results in each party having in advance
of the evidence in chief of the other party’s witnesses. Expert evidence has for many years been pre-disclosed in the form
of reports. Parties exchange written skeleton arguments which set out, often in considerable detail, the legal argument along
with references to case law and legislation. The court may require parties to prepare lists of issues prior to the hearing, a
technique that can be extremely valuable in a complicated case. But these documents all relate to the trial process itself. One
of the effects of the CPR is to place greater emphasis on the beginning of the litigation process. The framing of the claim
and the defence in the statement of case will constitute the basis for case management in the early stages of the action. In
the Commercial Court, for example, the case memorandum and list of common ground and issues, both of which must be
prepared for the case management conference, 118  supplement the statements of case in this respect.
Drafting statements of case
1-25
This section sets out the general principles that should be observed in drafting statements of case. The requirements are set
out in both the rules and the associated Practice Direction of Pt 16 of the CPR (PD 16). There are certain requirements that
apply to individual statements of case, such as particulars of claim and defences. These are considered in the next section.
Particular types of fact situation (for example fraud allegations) attract special rules, which are considered below; as are the
rules as to amendment under CPR Pt 17.
The Report and Recommendations of the Commercial Court Long Trials Working Party, which was published in December
2007, reviewed the practice of pleading in that division. Its observations, however, are wide ranging, and are pertinent to
statements of case in any court. It noted that statements of case were becoming increasingly complex and lengthy, and in

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
16
some cases had become “virtually unreadable”. It attributed this to three factors (see p.21), which should be considered
whenever drafting:
“First, pleaders often depart from the former basic rule that only material facts, not background facts, nor
evidence, nor law nor argument should be pleaded. Secondly, pleaders are often under pressure from clients
to ‘argue’ in detail their case, in the manner of a Complaint in United States litigation. Thirdly, pleaders are
naturally anxious to ensure that opponents should not be able to assert that a point of fact or law cannot be
pursued at a trial because it has not been adequately pleaded.”
Brevity
1-26
The guiding principle has always been that pleadings must be succinct. The Rules of the Supreme Court stated explicitly that:
“… every pleading must contain, and contain only, a statement in a summary form of the material facts on
which the party pleading relies for his claim or defence, as the case may be, but not the evidence by which
those facts are to be proved, and the statement must be as brief as the nature of the case admits.” 119
This rule, however, was frequently ignored. In the CPR, the issue is dealt with in the context of particulars of claim which must
include “a concise statement of facts on which the claimant relies” (r.16.4(1)(a)). The White Book comments that “the primary
function of the particulars of claim is to state concisely the facts on which the claimant relies” (16.4.1). More generally, the
Court of Appeal has made it clear that no more than a “concise” statement of facts is required. 120  The Chancery Guide,
it has been said,
“… contains a powerful message that the prolixity of the old pleading practices is to be a thing of the past.
Where fraud or dishonesty is alleged, a party must set out full particulars of any such allegation and, where
any inference of fraud or dishonesty is alleged, the facts on the basis of which the inference is alleged (CPR
16.4(1)(e), Pt 16 PD, para.10.2(1) and (5)). This does not require, or permit, the recycling of pages and pages of
evidence. How evidence is to be adduced will be a matter for the judge in the exercise of his case management
powers.” 121
As noted above, the courts have again become increasingly concerned by the length and unintelligibility of statements of case,
particularly in the context of commercial disputes. A particularly striking example was the decision in Dunn v Glass Systems
(UK) Ltd, 122  which concerned an application to strike out the particulars of claim. The particulars were 221 pages long.
According to the claimant, he had spent 628.25 hours drafting them and certain ancillary documents. The court described
the “sheer length of the pleading” as “oppressive” (at [70]) and concluded that the claimant had “no idea how to draft a
pleading” (at [96]).
In cases where the pleadings are lengthy, reference should be made to CPR 16 PD 1.4 which states:
“If exceptionally a statement of case exceeds 25 pages (excluding schedules) an appropriate short summary
must also be filed and served.”
When proceedings are issued in the Commercial Court permission is also required to file and serve a statement of case longer
than 25 pages. 123
A failure to heed the need for statements of case to be concise may well lead to strict adverse costs orders. 124  The same
applies to the Admiralty Court.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
17
Plain English
1-27
The term “Plain English” should not imply a lack of intellectual rigour. It simply recognises the fact that language is a mobile
idiom that changes over time. Lord Woolf was anxious to make the civil justice system understandable to all those who use
it. The drafting of the CPR reflects this conviction. As regards statements of case he said that he “would expect the language
of pleadings also to avoid technicality.” 125  Until recently, it was the practice when drafting a defence to conclude with a
“general traverse”. In the 1999 edition of the White Book (the last to be published before the introduction of the CPR) the
following form of words appears: “Save as hereinbefore specifically admitted, the Defendant denies each and every allegation
contained in the Statement of Claim as though the same was herein set out and traversed seriatim” (RSC Ord.18/13/6). This
is a useful example of the sort of language to be avoided under the CPR. 126
Direct, not evasive
1-28
Statements of case should not be evasive. Even as long ago as the advent of the CPR, Lord Woolf expressed the view that,
“in cases where the facts are potentially in dispute, the emphasis in future will be on the clear statement of factual allegations
by the claimant and on equally clear answers by the defendant. The aim is to put an end to the evasive and obscure pleading
which often discredits our civil procedures at present.” 127  He regarded the requirement of the statement of truth as militating
towards this goal. As regards defences, the rule that a denial must not be evasive pre-dates the CPR. It has been described
as “a basic rule of pleading, since a traverse which is evasive, or ambiguous, or equivocal or does not answer the point of
substance will not amount to a specific traverse of the allegation”. 128
A defence must provide a comprehensive response to the particulars of claim. A bare denial is not acceptable: the defendant
must state his reasons for a denial (r.16.5(2)(a)). For the same reason, a “general traverse” is not permissible. Generally
speaking, the consequence of failing to deal with an allegation in a defence is that the allegation is taken to be admitted
(r.16.5(5)). 129  The habit of tactical pleading may be hard to eradicate, but it is clearly contrary to the spirit of the CPR. Where
at the time of drafting, facts are genuinely unascertainable within the time limit for the statement of case to be served or are
not within the pleading party’s knowledge at all, the appropriate course is to state as much and to require the claimant to prove
the relevant allegation. A denial can be substituted by later amendment if appropriate. The concept of a “non-admission”,
which is adopted as short hand for averring that a matter is outside the pleading party’s knowledge and as such is required to
be proved, continues to be in common usage (see below); albeit the terminology is not expressly envisaged by the CPR.
Layout
1-29
Paragraphed, chronological presentation of statements of case are and should be the norm. The Chancery and Commercial
Court Guides contain explicit provisions to that effect. 130  There is a practical reason for the rule, because unless allegations
are presented separately, a defendant may be hampered in answering them in accordance with CPR r.16.5 and PD 16 para.1.4.
As noted earlier, statements of case in the Commercial Court should be limited to 25 pages in length whenever possible. 131
The Practice Direction supplementing CPR Pt 16 contains certain additional requirements as regards the heading of particulars
of claim served separately from the claim form (PD 16 para.3.8). The layout of amendments is considered separately below.
Facts
1-30

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
18
The discussion set out above shows that the principal function of a statement of case is to state the facts relied on. The
pre-CPR position was that pleadings were only to state material facts. 132  That is no longer the case. Rule 16.4(1)(a) provides
that particulars of claim must include a concise statement of the facts on which the claimant relies. But under the CPR there
is no provision limiting the statement of case to material facts. This was a conscious decision intended to promote flexibility.
In particular, there is no longer any objection to including references to evidence or legal argument in a statement of case.
This point is considered further below. Foreign law is regarded as a question of fact in the English courts, and the general
rule is that if a party wishes to rely on a foreign law he must plead it in the same way as any other fact. 133  In practice, the
statement of case will be supplemented by a detailed expert’s report on the applicable foreign law.
Reference to law
1-31
The Practice Direction supplementing CPR Pt 16 provides “A party may … refer in his statement of case to any point of law
on which his claim or defence, as the case may be, is based.” As Buxton LJ has stated:
“A beneficial effect of the Civil Procedure Rules is that by CPR PD16 para.13.3(1) it is now made clear, as
under the Rules of the Supreme Court it was not, that a party in his pleading may ‘refer’ to any proposition of
law on which his case is based. It will often be valuable that he should do so, because parties, and the court,
should not be left to speculate upon the relevance in law of a purely factual narrative.” 134
Although detailed legal argument is best set out in skeleton arguments, it will often be good practice to identify the point of law
concerned in the statement of case. 135  This is because the statement of case should clearly state what the case is about; that is
its function. Without necessarily requiring the details of the argument to be set out, points of law should be clearly identified
where to do so is necessary to give adequate notice to the other side. Reference to case law is not generally appropriate. On
the other hand, where reliance will be placed on legislation, the legislation and relevant sections should be identified. 136
As regards the European Convention on Human Rights, the Court of Appeal has said that if the court is not going to be
taken down blind alleys it is essential that counsel, and those who instruct counsel, take a responsible attitude as to when it is
right to raise a Human Rights Act point. 137  Another division of the Court of Appeal has emphasised that, with the coming
into force of the Convention in the United Kingdom, it is important “… to ensure that Convention rights are not asserted in
inappropriate circumstances; so that they play their proper, and important, role, but only their proper role, in the protection
of the citizen’s interests”. 138  When a claimant intends to raise a Human Rights Act issue, it should also be indicated by
ticking the box on the Claim Form.
Reference to evidence
1-32
There is no express prohibition against pleading evidence in the CPR, though it does appear in at least one specialist guide
and it is a cardinal lesson in pleading that, as a general rule, statements of case should not plead evidence. Indeed, it should
be emphasised that the purpose of omitting the prohibition in the CPR is not to qualify the basic requirement for clarity and
brevity; rather it is in keeping with the flexible response advocated in the CPR generally.
PD 16 para.13.3 states explicitly that a party may give in his statement of case the name of any witness he proposes to call,
and to attach or serve with the statement of case any document which he considers is necessary to the claim or defence. This
includes experts’ reports. 139  Where a claim is based on a written agreement, PD 16 para.7.3 states that a copy of the contract
should be attached to the particulars of claim. General conditions of sale incorporated in the contract should also be attached.
Where either document is bulky only the relevant parts should be attached. 140  The Commercial Court Guide stipulates that
this provision applies equally to the defence (unless the defence and the claim are based on the same agreement). This sensible
principle should be adopted generally. The Guide also makes it clear that only the relevant parts of the document should be

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
19
attached where that is sufficient. In general, attaching more than 20 pages of a written agreement is likely to increase the
bulk unduly but it depends on the circumstances.
It is sometimes convenient to attach key documents other than the contract at issue, but only where such documents are likely
to be dispositive. The Commercial Court Guide points out that:
“in many cases attaching documents to or serving documents with a statement of case does not promote the
efficient conduct of the proceedings and should be avoided … only those documents which are obviously of
critical importance and necessary for a proper understanding of the statement of case should be attached to or
served with it.” 141
Paragraph C1.1(e) of the Guide dealing with statements of case in the Commercial Court says that evidence should not be
included, 142  and in this respect goes further than the CPR. Similarly, the Chancery Guide provides that the names of any
witness may be given and necessary documents attached but otherwise no evidence should be included. 143
The approach in the guides appears to be consistent with the view taken by the courts generally. The Court of Appeal
has firmly rejected the “recycling of pages and pages of evidence”. 144  And in McPhilemy v Times Newspapers Ltd, Lord
Woolf MR pointed out (as noted earlier) that the need for extensive pleadings should be reduced by the requirement that
witness statements are now exchanged prior to trial. 145  This will generally make the detail of the case the other side has to
meet obvious. Further, “parties who have adequately complied with pre-action protocols will often have become sufficiently
familiar with each others’ positions to be able to formulate their own case with relative simplicity.” 146  Conversely, it is not
acceptable to rely on a witness statement to fill a gap in a statement of case, where the issue does not appear clearly from
the statement of case. In Rixon v Chief Constable of Kent 147  Brooke LJ refused to accept reference to a 15-page witness
statement with 70 pages of supporting documents, in respect of an un-pleaded cause of action. He said that “this huge volume
of evidence provides ample justification for the old rule that a party’s pleaded case should set out the facts relied on, and not
the evidence by which those facts will be proved.”
Consistency
1-33
Statements of case must be internally consistent, though alternative cases may of course be advanced. They must also be
externally consistent. This rule is expressed in para.9.2 of PD16, which provides that “a subsequent statement of case must
not contradict or be inconsistent with an earlier one; for example, a reply to a defence must not bring in a new claim. Where
new matters have come to light, the appropriate course may be to seek the court’s permission to amend the statement of case.”
Pleading Fraud
1-34
It has long been the case that the requirements for pleading fraud are more stringent, requiring a higher degree of specificity
and clarity. The classic statement of principle is that of Thesiger LJ in Day v Garrett 148 :
“In the Common Law Courts no rule was more clearly settled than that fraud must be distinctly alleged and as
distinctly proved, and that it was not allowable to leave fraud to be interred from the facts … It appears to me that
a Plaintiff is bound to shew distinctly that he means to allege fraud.”
In Three Rivers DC v Governor and Company of the Bank of England, 149  Lord Millett considered the requirements for pleading
fraud and noted that:

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
20
“It is important to appreciate that there are two principles in play. The first is a matter of pleading. The function of
pleadings is to give the party opposite sufficient notice of the case which is being made against him. If the pleader
means ‘dishonestly’ or ‘fraudulently’, it may not be enough to say ‘willfully’ or ‘recklessly’. Such language is
equivocal.”
“The second principle, which is quite distinct, is that an allegation of fraud or dishonesty must be sufficiently
particularised, and that particulars of facts which are consistent with honesty are not sufficient. This is only partly
a matter of pleading. It is also a matter of substance. As I have said, the defendant is entitled to know the case he
has to meet. But since dishonesty is usually a matter of inference from primary facts, this involves knowing not
only that he is alleged to have acted dishonestly, but also the primary facts which will be relied upon at trial to
justify the inference. At trial the court will not normally allow proof of primary facts which have not been pleaded,
and will not do so in a case of fraud. It is not open to the court to infer dishonesty from facts which have not been
pleaded, or from facts which have been pleaded but are consistent with honesty. There must be some fact which
tilts the balance and justifies an inference of dishonesty, and this fact must be both pleaded and proved.” 150
When considering whether to plead fraud, regard should be had to the material available, the requirements of the pleader’s code
of conduct, the CPR (especially PD 16 para.8.2(1–7), the standard of proof that will be required at trial and, for claims in the
Chancery or Commercial divisions, the requirements of the relevant Guide. 151
It should also be noted that, following the decision of the House of Lords in Medcalf v Mardell, 152  the requirement “is not that
counsel should necessarily have before him evidence in admissible form but that he should have material of such a character as
to lead responsible counsel to conclude that serious allegations could properly be based upon it.” 153
The specific requirements for pleading fraud are therefore that a claimant must set out in the particulars of claim any allegation
of fraud, details of any misrepresentation, breaches of trust, notice or knowledge of the facts. Again, however, this should not
detract from the basic requirement of brevity. The statement of case should only refer to those facts necessary to formulate
the cause of action and to make clear what it is in issue. 154  For a more detailed explanation of the requirements for pleading
fraud see Vol.2: Fraud.
Individual statements of case
The claim form
1-35
Under the CPR, all claims are commenced by the issue of a “claim form.” 155  There is a set of standard form documents,
and the relevant Practice Direction requires that these are used. 156  Most claims are begun under Pt 7, but there is also an
“expedited” claims procedure under Pt 8. This is used in circumstances where the claimant “seeks the court’s decision on a
question which is unlikely to involve a substantial dispute of fact”, 157  as well as the particular types of claim listed in the
PD 8. Specific claim forms also exist for some specialist proceedings.
The claim form must (a) contain a concise statement of the nature of claim; (b) specify the remedy which the claimant seeks;
and (c) where the claimant is making a claim for money, contain a “statement of value” (r.16.2). The “statement of value”
is a statement of the amount of money which is being claimed. Where it is not possible to provide a specific quantum, the
claimant must at least state whether he expects to recover (a) not more than £10,000 (b) between £10,000 and £25,000, or
(c) more than £25,000. These financial limits reflect the delineation between the different case management tracks: £10,000
and £25,000 are the upper financial limits for the small claims track and the fast track respectively. Special rules apply to
claims for personal injury 158  and to claims by a tenant of residential premises against his landlord. 159  In calculating the

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
21
expected value of the claim, the claimant must disregard interest, costs, any potential finding of contributory negligence, any
potential set-off or counterclaim, or any liability to make a payment under the Social Security (Recovery of Benefits) Act
1997. 160  The statement of value does not limit the power of the court to give judgment for the amount to which it finds
the claimant is entitled. 161
Certain specialist courts have modified claim forms for issuing a claim intended to be designated to those courts. For instance,
Form N1(CC) is a modified claim form available for use in the Commercial Court. Similarly, the Chancery Division Financial
List uses Form N1(CHFL). Care should be taken to ensure that the correct claim form is filed and served (together with the
correct response pack, in the case of service).
Where the claim is to be served out of the jurisdiction, and can be done so without the permission of the court, the claim
form should be endorsed with a statement that the court has power under the Civil Jurisdiction and Judgments Act 1982 to
deal with the claim and that no proceedings based on the same claim are pending between the parties in Scotland, Northern
Ireland or another Convention territory. 162
Particulars of claim
1-36
The fundamental requirement of the particulars of claim is to set out “a concise statement of the facts on which the claimant
relies”. 163  Those facts must establish the cause, or causes, of action upon which the claimant’s case depends. As explained
above, if the pleaded facts (even if established) do not amount to a cause of action, the particulars of claim will be liable
to be struck out under r.3.4(2)(a).
Part 16 and its Practice Direction contain a number of specific requirements. The claimant must specify the grounds for
any claim for aggravated, exemplary, or provisional damages. 164  There are also detailed provisions in relation to claims
for interest: in essence, the claimant must specify the basis upon which the claim for interest is made (this will usually be
contractual or statutory), and (if the claim is for a specified sum of money) the precise amount of interest sought and the
continuing rate of accrual. 165  The particulars of claim must also contain particulars of any allegation of fraud, illegality,
misrepresentation, breach of trust, notice or knowledge of any fact, unsoundness of mind or undue influence, or wilful
default. 166
These requirements were also included in the old Rules of the Supreme Court. 167  In a well-known formulation of the
principle, it was said that “in the Common Law Courts no rule was more clearly settled than that fraud must be distinctly
alleged and as distinctly proved, and that it was not allowable to leave fraud to be inferred from the facts”, Davy v Garrett
(1878) 7 Ch D 473, 489. The reason for this is that fraud is a serious allegation, and should not be made without proper
grounds.
A claimant should also set out “any facts relating to mitigation of loss or damage,” 168  though typically issues of mitigation
(or failure to mitigate) are likely to be raised by the defendant. However, the claimant should set out any positive case which
he advances on mitigation at the outset, rather than waiting to include it in the reply. The purpose of the requirement is to
avoid claims for the full amount of loss, which has in fact been successfully mitigated.
As explained above, where a claim is based upon a written agreement, a copy of the agreement should usually be attached
to or served with the particulars of claim, as well as any general conditions of sale incorporated in the contract. 169  Where
a claim is based upon an oral agreement, the particulars of claim should set out the contractual words used, and state by
whom, to whom, when and where they were spoken. 170  In addition, a claimant may (but need not) plead any point of law
on which the claim is based, set out the names of any witnesses whom he proposes to call, or attach any document which
he considers necessary to his claim. 171
There are also detailed provisions in relation to personal injury claims, 172  fatal accident claims 173  and hire purchase
claims. 174  Special requirements apply to certain Consumer Credit Act claims, defamation claims, which are governed by Pt
53, judicial review (Pt 55), Landlord and Tenant Claims (Pt 56) and Probate and Related Matters (Pt 57).

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
22
Defence
1-37
A defence must provide a comprehensive response to the particulars of claim. As suggested above, a bare denial of an
allegation will not suffice, and will be liable to be struck out. Rule 16.5(2) provides that a denial by the defendant of an
allegation made by the claimant in the particulars of claim must be supported by reasons. If he intends to put forward a different
version of events from that given by the claimant, he must state his own version. This is consonant with the underlying
purpose of the CPR. The aim and effect is to require the defendant, as well as the claimant, to set out his factual case at the
outset. The basic principle under r.16.5 is that the defendant should deal with each allegation made in the particulars of claim,
either by way of an admission, a reasoned denial, or by requiring the claimant to prove the allegation (in other words putting
him to proof). It further requires that “if he intends to put forward a different version of events from that given by the claimant,
he must state his own version”. 175  Rule 16.5(3) provides that where a defendant fails to deal with an allegation, he shall
be taken to require that allegation to be proved, provided that he has set out in his defence the nature of his case in relation
to the issue to which that allegation is relevant. Subject to this, he will be taken to have admitted any allegation which he
does not deal with. 176  The general “saving clause”, 177  commonly seen at the conclusion of old-style defences, whereby the
defendant denied “each and every allegation as if separately traversed”, is not permitted under the CPR. Either the defendant
has responded to an allegation (or at least set out his factual response to the issue to which it relates) or he has not, in which
case he will be taken to have admitted that allegation. But, where the claim includes a money claim, a defendant shall be taken
to require that any allegation relating to the amount of money claimed be proved unless he expressly admits the allegation. 178
There has been a divergence of practice as regards the continued use of phrases such as “not admit” or “no admissions
are made”. It is clear however that such language must be used with caution. These terms do not reflect the actual text of
r.16.5, and moreover the underlying concept has fundamentally changed since the introduction of the CPR. Under the former
procedure, a defendant could elect to put the claimant to proof in relation to any pleaded allegation (although, strictly, with
the consequence that he would not be permitted to adduce at trial positive evidence in relation to that allegation). That option
is not available under the CPR: the question is not whether the defendant chooses “not to admit” an allegation, but whether
he is “unable to admit or deny” the allegation, and requires the claimant to prove it. As a matter of drafting it is preferable
to include that phrase, or the phrase “required to prove”, both of which are found within the text of r.16.5. The defendant
should be careful not to state that he is “unable” to deal with an allegation unless that is factually correct, since to do so would
be inconsistent with the statement of truth. Whether or not a defendant is unable to admit or deny any particular allegation
is a question of fact in the individual case, and is of course also subject to the statement of truth. For example, a defendant
should be entitled to state that he is “unable” to admit or deny an allegation which (though theoretically within his sphere
of knowledge) would require investigative work which is disproportionate to its importance. Here, the guiding principle is
the overriding objective which requires the case to be dealt with in a manner which is proportionate. 179  For example, in the
recent Court of Appeal decision in SPI North Ltd v Swiss Post International (UK) Ltd, 180  it was held that r.16.5(1)(b) did
not oblige a defendant to make reasonable enquiries of third parties before stating in his defence that he was unable to admit
or deny an allegation. Rather, the purpose of a defence was to define and narrow the issues between the parties in general
terms, on the basis of knowledge and information that the defendant had readily available to him during the short period
afforded by the rules for filing a defence. The more limited use of non-admissions means that, generally, they should more
seldomly be used as a tactical tool.
A number of specific requirements are set out in Pt 16 and its Practice Direction. The defendant must give details of any
limitation period relied upon, 181  and there are specific rules relating to the defence of tender, 182  personal injury claims 183
and defences arising out of the Human Rights Act 1998. 184  A defendant is entitled, but not obliged, to refer to any point of
law on which his defence is based, give the name of any proposed witnesses, and attach a copy of any document which he
considers necessary to his defence. 185  The defendant may plead any defence of set-off, whether or not it is a Pt 20 claim 186
(as to which, see para.1-39).

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
23
Reply
1-38
A reply is always optional. A claimant who does not file a reply is not taken to admit the matters raised in the defence. 187
However, it is advisable for a claimant to serve a reply if he wishes to allege facts in answer to the defence which were not
included in his claim, or if he wishes to take a point or raise any fact which, in the light of the defence, may cause his opponent
difficulty if he does not mention it. In general, the approach should be only to serve a reply if it is required to clarify the
issues in the case. It should contain only those points which genuinely require a reply, and should not be used restate a party’s
entire case (see The Report and Recommendations of the Commercial Court Long Trials Working Party, p.22). Unlike the
defence, a reply need not deal with every allegation. Unless the claimant makes an express admission, the defendant will be
required to prove the matters raised in his defence. 188  It follows that the “general rejoinder” paragraph 189  commonly found
in replies under the old procedure is redundant. The reply must be verified by a statement of truth. 190
A reply must not contradict or be inconsistent with the claim, and the claimant should not introduce new claims or causes
of action within the reply; if he wishes to do so he should amend his particulars of claim. The reply is usually the last of the
statements of case. Rule 15.9 provides that no party may file or serve a statement of case after a reply without the permission
of the court. 191
Third Party Claims
1-39
Counterclaims, claims for contribution or an indemnity, and claims against third parties are all dealt within under the procedure
set out in Pt 20, and are referred to generically as “additional claims”. 192  Until the Civil Procedure (Amendment No.4) Rules
2005, which came into force on 6 April 2006, claims under this part were referred to as “Part 20 claims”. Those amendments
went some way to meet the criticisms that had been levelled at the former procedure: “The aim of the Pt 20 claims procedure
was to simplify the procedure …. In practice this has not been achieved. The Pt 20 claims procedure is both complex and
confusing, covering a number of different types of claim.” 193
An additional claim is, in general, treated as a claim in its own right, 194  and the general drafting principles set out above
apply. If the defendant wishes to raise a counterclaim against the claimant, the defence and counterclaim should normally
form a single document 195  (as previously). Equally, a reply and defence to counterclaim should continue to be set out
together. 196  Unlike the former county court procedure, where a defence to a counterclaim was optional, any person served
with a counterclaim (or any additional claim) should now file a defence in accordance with r.15.2. Where the defendant
wishes to counterclaim not only against the defendant but also against a person who is not already a party, he must make
an application to the court for an order that that person be added as an additional party. 197  That application can be made
without notice, 198  but it must be made under Pt 23 and be supported by evidence. 199  Permission is not required to make a
counterclaim against the claimant so long as it is filed with the defence. 200  Permission is also not required for an additional
claim against a third party, other than a counterclaim, so long as it is issued before, or at the same time, as the defence is
filed. 201
In order for a defendant to make a claim for contribution or indemnity against a co-defendant, he must file and serve a notice
containing a statement of the nature and grounds of his claim. 202  Permission is not required to do so, as long as the notice
is filed and served with the defence, or, if the co-defendant is added to the claim later, within 28 days of that party filing its
defence. 203  Any other claim against a non-Party must now be commenced by way of a Pt 20 claim form. 204  Particulars of
the additional claim should be contained in or served with that claim form. Since an additional claim is, in general, treated as
a claim in its own right, those particulars should take the same form as standard particulars of claim. The formal requirements
are set out in the Practice Direction supplementing Pt 20. When there is an additional claim parties should no longer be
referred to by multiple titles (e.g. “Defendant/Part 20 Claimant”), but must have a single identification. The claimant and
defendant in the original claim are always referred to by those titles alone; additional parties are referred to by the order in

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
24
which they were joined to the proceedings (“third party”, “fourth party”, etc.). 205  An additional claim must be verified by
a statement of truth. 206
Further Information
1-40
Under the old system, “requests for further and better particulars” had become almost routine, and were frequently very
lengthy. The result was often obfuscation rather than clarity. Lord Woolf discussed solutions to the problem in Access to
Justice, Interim Report, Ch.20. He envisaged the need for formal particulars to be significantly reduced by the process of
clarifying the issues at the case management conference:
“If the matters needing clarification are not straightforward or if the whole case needed elucidation, the
procedural judge would hold a case management conference. … I anticipate that, as a consequence of these
steps, the need for further exchanges between the parties (requests for further and better particulars, notices
to admit, interrogatories) should largely be eliminated …. It would not, however, be possible to eliminate all
possibility of new facts requiring to be stated or of a need to clarify matters already set out. This could arise, for
example, as the result of disclosure of documents. A party requiring further material could seek it, informally,
from his opponent. If he does not obtain a co-operative response, he can apply to the court for an appropriate
order. Equally, a party receiving a request which he considers to be merely vexatious can apply to the court
to be dispensed from dealing with it.”
This approach is reflected in Pt 18 of the CPR (Further Information). The Commercial Court Guide provides that “Court will
only order further information to be provided if satisfied that the information requested is strictly necessary to understand
another party’s case”, Section D15.1(c)).
Unfortunately, in many cases the requirements of PD 18 para.1.2, in particular, are overlooked, leading to requests for further
information that are broader than the “further and better particulars” characteristic of the pre-CPR regime, and that occupy
some of the ground formerly taken by interrogatories, probing factual issues otherwise outside the scope of the statements
of case. It should, however, be noted that a party requested to provide further information can refuse, where to do so would
be disproportionate. 207  Further, in considering whether to order a party to provide further information the court will have
regard to the requirements of the overriding objective. 208  Under r.18.1, the court may at any time order a party “(a) clarify
any matter which is in dispute in the proceedings; or (b) give additional information in relation to any such matter, whether
or not the matter is contained or referred to in a statement of case”. 209
The system of judicial scrutiny under case management should mean that recourse to a formal procedure of particularisation
by way of an exchange of questions and answers will now be less frequent or important. It is part of the court’s function to
identify the issues at an early stage of proceedings, and it can only do so if those issues can be readily discerned from the
statements of case. Where the statements of case are defective or insufficient, the court can order that the statement of case
be amended or reformulated. To quote the White Book, “As part of its responsibility for managing cases the court will ensure
that the parties plainly state the factual ingredients of their case so that true nature and scope of the dispute can be identified
… if the issues cannot be readily identified from statements of case, directions are given to rectify this.” 210  Equally, the fact
that a party has not provided all available details in relation to a particular allegation should not matter: it is the function of the
statement of case to set out only the essential facts. The full details are dealt with by way of exchange of witness statements.
1-41
A very considerable body of case law developed under the old procedure as to the degree of particularisation required in
relation to particular allegations. Apart from the specific provisions now contained in Pt 16 and its Practice Direction, that
complex set of rules has now to a large extent been superseded by the general principle that a request for further information
should be “concise and strictly confined to matters which are reasonably necessary and proportionate to enable the first
party 211  to prepare his own case or to understand the case he has to meet”. 212  In other words, whilst the essential facts must
be set out in every case, the degree of particularisation required at the initial stage of the litigation will depend upon what is

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
25
proportionate. 213  It is important that this principle is adhered to, since it is contrary to the overriding objective for requests
for further information to be over elaborate, resembling requests for further and better particulars under a new name.
The Practice Direction sets out the procedure. In summary, before applying to the court, a preliminary request should be
served on the other party. It can take the form of a letter if the Request is brief, 214  or a separate document. In both cases
it must be properly headed, setting out in separate numbered paragraphs each request for information or clarification. The
response must repeat the text of each separate paragraph of the request and set out under each paragraph the response to it. If
the request is not answered, the requesting party may apply for an order. The responding party must serve on every other party,
and file with the court, a copy of both the request and the response. The response must be verified by a statement of truth.
Amendment
1-42
Amendments to statements of case are governed by CPR Pt 17. 215  Part 19, which deals with the addition and substitution
of parties, is also relevant. 216  The regime under the CPR differs from its predecessor in three main respects. First, the scope
for a party to make amendments without leave has been curtailed. Secondly, other than in the Commercial and Admiralty
Courts, 217  it is no longer necessary for a statement of case in its amended form to show the original text, unless the court
orders otherwise, but this is still permissible and has remained the usual practice in the High Court 218  (and may be important
in demonstrating how a party has changed his case). Thirdly, there has been a change in emphasis to the general principles
which the court will apply in exercising its discretion to grant permission to amend.
The basic principle is that a party is free to amend his statement of case at any time before it has been served, 219  but thereafter
may only amend with either the consent of the parties or with the permission of the court. 220  Special rules apply where
the effect of the amendment is to remove, add or substitute a party: in those circumstances it is necessary to obtain the
court’s permission if the claim form has been served. 221  Detailed provisions also deal with the addition or substitution of
new claims, 222  the correction of a mistake as to the name of a party, 223  the alteration of the capacity in which a party is
claiming, 224  and the addition or substitution of a party (in particular, where limitation is in issue). 225
Under the CPR, and putting aside in particular the rules relating to limitation which seek to give effect to s.35 of the Limitation
Act 1980 (see para.1-44), the fundamental criteria to which the court must have regard are set out within the overriding
objective. 226  It is part of the court’s case management function to identify the issues at an early stage in the proceedings, 227
and the court will to a considerable extent depend on the statements of case in carrying out that function. As the litigation
proceeds, the court will continue to be guided by the issues as set out in the statements of case when making decisions as to
allocation, disclosure, and exchange of witness statements and other evidence.
1-43
It follows that, as a general principle, whilst there is a power to allow an amendment at any stage of the proceedings, the
court may be increasingly reluctant, as the case proceeds, to allow amendments that change or redefine the issues. 228  This
is particularly so if the effect would be to delay the trial. “Late amendments could undermine the just resolution of a dispute
rather than advance it … they may delay the final resolution, cause confusion, or waste litigant and court resources.” 229
The court will also have regard to the need for the cost of litigation to be proportionate and will not allow amendments that
would detract from that aim by, for example, being insufficiently concise. 230  Where the permission of the court is required
to amend a statement of case, it may impose conditions 231  and will often order the party who obtains permission to pay
the other parties’ “costs of and caused by” the application. In exercising its discretion, the court will consider the stage of
progress of the litigation, as well as proportionality and the other factors defining the overriding objective. It will also require
the proposed amendment to have some prospects of success. 232  The decision requires a balancing exercise:
“As is so often the case where a party applies to amend a pleading or to call evidence for which permission is
needed, the justice of the case can be said to involve two competing factors. The first factor is that it is desirable
that every point which a party reasonably wants to put forward in the proceedings is aired: a party prevented
from advancing evidence and/or argument on a point (other than a hopeless one) will understandably feel that

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
26
an injustice has been perpetrated on him, at least if he loses and has reason to believe that he may have won if
he had been allowed to plead, call evidence on, and/or argue the point. Particularly where the other party can be
compensated in costs for any damage suffered as a result of a late application being granted, there is obviously
a powerful case to be made out that justice indicates that the amendment should be permitted …
On the other hand, even where, in purely financial terms, the other party can be said to be compensated for a
late amendment or late evidence by an appropriate award of costs, it can often be unfair in terms of the strain of
litigation, legitimate expectation, the efficient conduct of the case in question, and the interests of other litigants
whose cases are waiting to be heard, if such an application succeeds.” 233
Even if an issue has been raised in a witness statement or document served by a party, that party will not necessarily be given
permission to amend. 234  Amendments which jeopardise the trial date are likely to receive particular scrutiny. 235  In EDO
Technology Ltd v Campaign to Smash EDO Walker J stated that:
“In general, parties should rigorously evaluate their case on any proposed new issues which would be likely
to delay trial. If the decision is taken that such an issue is so important that it ought to be advanced, then
the application to amend should include an application for directions to enable a manageable trial date to be
rearranged.”
The later the application to amend, the less the chance of success. 236  On the other hand, in appropriate circumstances, there
is power to grant permission to amend between judgment and the drawing up of the order. 237
1-44
Special rules also apply to amendments after the end of a relevant limitation period. This is because the amendment takes
effect from the date of the original action. 238  It can therefore operate to deprive a defendant of a limitation defence. The
basic rules are set out in CPR rr.17.4 and 19.5, but the substantive law in this regard has not been substantially altered by the
introduction of the CPR and as such the pre-CPR jurisprudence is still of some relevance. 239
The addition of an otherwise time-barred cause of action will usually be permitted where:
“The new cause of action is simply a fresh legal formulation of the plaintiffs’ case, involving no factual
allegation other than those already pleaded as founding the original causes of action, and involving no new
head of relief other than those already pleaded.” 240
Reference should also be made to the extensive authority, both pre and post-CPR, considering the many other situations in
which amendments may be made after the end of a limitation period, which are set out in the White Book commentary to
Pts 17 and 19.
In appropriate circumstances the court will permit an amendment to include a cause of action that did not accrue until after
the date of the original claim. 241
Generally, the consent of the other parties should be sought for an amendment before applying to the court for permission.
In accordance with the overriding objective, if a party unreasonably withholds consent it is at risk of an adverse costs order:
“Under the CPR regime a party who has an amendment which really ought to be consented to and which it
is obvious the court is going to grant if there is a dispute, is an amendment in respect of which the costs of
an application can be visited on the amended-against party, notwithstanding the normal rule as to the costs
of amendment. It will behove parties in commercial litigation, and indeed in all litigation, to view sensibly
applications to amend by the other side and not to inflate the costs unnecessarily by an unreasonable refusal
to consent.” 242

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
27
Specialist proceedings and specialist lists
1-45
The CPR makes provision for the commencement and conduct of specialist proceedings. The specialist proceedings in Pt 49
now include only proceedings under the “Companies Acts 1985 and 2006 and Other Legislation Relating to Companies”.
The majority of specialist proceedings are set out in their own parts of the CPR, from Pt 53, and following. Those parts and
practice directions set out specific rules applicable to those proceedings, including rules concerning statements of case. Many
specialist proceedings are dealt with in specialist lists in both the High Court and the county court. The specialist lists in
the Business and Property Courts include the Commercial Court and Admiralty Court, arbitration proceedings, mercantile
actions, Patents Court business, Technology and Construction Court business, proceedings under the Companies Acts, and
contentious probate proceedings. The Practice Direction to PD16 provides (paragraph 1.2) that, where special provisions
about statements of case are made by the rules and practice directions applying to particular types of proceedings, the
provisions of CPR Pt 16 and of that Practice Direction apply only to the extent that they are not inconsistent with those
specific rules and practice directions.
Reference should be made in particular to the rules and notes of guidance in respect of statements of case to be found in the
Chancery Guide, 243  the Commercial Court Guide, 244  CPR Pt 61 and its practice direction in respect of Admiralty Claims, Pt
62 and its practice direction in respect of Arbitration Claims, 245  CPR Pt 59 in respect of Circuit Commercial Court claims, 246
the Patents Court Guide, 247  and CPR Pt 64 in respect of Estates, Trusts and Charities. 248  These specialist provisions govern
the conduct of proceedings in the tribunal concerned, and supplement the general principles applicable to statements of case.
Conclusion
1-46
The above principles apply in general terms to statements of case. It has been seen that their main purpose as a tool in litigation
is to define the issues concisely at as early a stage in the proceedings as possible; a point that is reinforced by both the rules
and interpreting authorities. It is important that both the letter and spirit of the rules are observed in this respect. The precedents
that follow cover most of the common (and some of the not so common) causes of action and defences that arise in practice.
Naturally, every case is different, and to a considerable extent the end result will reflect the style and skill of the person who
drafted it.
Sir William Blair, Ryan Ferro. 249
Footnotes
1
592 HL Deb cols.1593–97 (29 July 1998).
2
592 HL Deb cols.1602 (29 July 1998).
3
See Civil Justice Council, Impact of the Jackson reforms: Some Emerging Themes (21 March 2014), p.3.
4
Lord Justice Jackson, Review of Civil Litigation Costs: Final Report (December 2009).
5
See the comments of Sir Richard Scott VC in the KPMG lecture on 15 May 2000.
6
Morris v Bank of America National Trust [2000] 1 All E.R. 954.
7
A point inherent in the title of Lord Woolf’s reports, Access to Justice.
8
Although litigants in person are not a “privileged” class of litigants for whom the rules are modified or disapplied:
Ogiehor v Belinfantie [2018] EWCA Civ 2423; [2018] 6 Costs L.R. 1329 at [24]. They are not entitled to any greater
indulgence in complying with the CPR than a represented party and can generally be expected to familiarise themselves

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
28
with the rules which apply to steps to be taken in the litigation: Barton v Wright Hassal LLP [2018] UKSC 12; [2018]
1 W.L.R. 1119 at [18].
9
See W.W. Buckland in Stein (ed), A Text-Book of Roman Law from Augustus to Justinian, 3rd edn (Cambridge
University Press, 1963) and B. Nicholas, An Introduction to Roman Law (Oxford University Press, 1962). There is no
exact definition of the most important “classical period” of Roman law but it can be put, at its widest, as ranging from
27 B.C. to A.D. 284 (see Nicholas, p.34).
10
J.W. Cecil Turner, Introduction to the Study of Roman Private Law (Cambridge: Bowes & Bowes, 1953), p.78.
11
See generally J.H. Baker, An Introduction to English Legal History, 3rd edn (London: Butterworths, 1990). Ch.5 contains
an excellent description of the history of pleadings.
12
See the fascinating account by Lord Bingham CJ, “The Future of the Common Law” (1999) 18 C.J.Q. 203, 208.
13
W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England, 1st edn (1765–69) (Chicago and London: University of Chicago
Press, 1979), Book III, Ch.20, p.313.
14
J.H. Baker, An Introduction to English Legal History, 3rd edn (London: Butterworths, 1990), p.84.
15
As was reflected by the contemporary remarks of Hale and Coke CJJ, quoted in J.H. Baker, An Introduction to English
Legal History, 3rd edn (1990).
16
For a judicial description, see Philipps v Philipps (1878) 4 Q.B.D. 127.
17
Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1875 Sch.I Ord. XIX, r.4.
18
Bullen and Leake and Jacob’s Precedents of Pleadings, 12th edn (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1975). Lord Denning
prescribed use of the book as the only remedy against this tendency to loose pleading. He had himself, when still at
the Bar, edited the ninth edition (1935).
19
Lord Woolf, Access to Justice: Interim Report (London: HMSO, 1995).
20
Lord Woolf, Access to Justice: Interim Report (London: HMSO, 1995).
21
Lord Woolf, Access to Justice: Interim Report (London: HMSO, 1995).
22
Lord Woolf, Access to Justice, Final Report (London: HMSO, 1996), Section V, para.14.
23
e.g. that service of a reply should require leave.
24
Thorp v Holdsworth (1876) 3 Ch. D. 637 at 639.
25
Barclays Bank v Boulter [1999] 1 W.L.R. 1919 at 1923; [1999] 4 All E.R. 513 at 517. See also Farrell v Secretary of
State for Defence [1980] 1 W.L.R. 172 at 180; [1980] 1 All E.R. 166 at 173, per Lord Edmund-Davies; Tchenguiz v
Grant Thornton UK LLP [2015] EWHC 405 (Comm); [2015] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 961 at [1], per Leggatt J.
26
See, e.g. the analysis in James, Hazard and Leubsdorf, Civil Procedure, 5th edn (New York: Foundation Press, 2001),
pp.2–4.
27
Access to Justice, Interim Report (London: HMSO, 1995), Ch.4, para.22. And see The Prudential Assurance Company
Ltd v HM Revenue and Customs [2016] EWCA Civ 376 at [20].
28
A point made by the NZ CA in Hopper Group Ltd v Parker (1987) 1 P.R.N.Z. 363 at 366.
29
For detailed consideration of the relevant rules of procedure in the CJEU, see K.P.E. Lasok, Lasok’s European Court
Practice and Procedure, 3rd edn (London: Bloomsbury Professional, 2017); K. Lenaerts, K. Gutman and I. Maselis, EU
Procedural Law (Oxford EU Law Library, 2014).
30
See K. Lenaerts, K. Gutman and I. Maselis, EU Procedural Law (Oxford EU Law Library, 2014). For the purposes
of this summary, the Court of Justice and the General Court (which was known as the Court of First Instance until
the coming into force of the Lisbon Treaty on 1 December 2009) are treated as the same, although they have different
jurisdictions in relation to direct actions.
31
see K.P.E. Lasok, The European Court of Justice, Practice and Procedure, 2nd edn (London: Butterworths, 1994), p.300,
on which point this analysis remains accurate today.
32
L. Neville Brown and T. Kennedy, The Court of Justice of the European Communities, 4th edn (London: Sweet &
Maxwell, 1994), p.251.
33
K. Lenaerts, D. Arts and I. Maselis in Bray (ed), Procedural Law of the European Union, 2nd edn (London: Sweet &
Maxwell, 2006). p.365, para.24-012.
34
Commission v France (Case 232/78) [1979] E.C.R. 2729 at 2737, para.3.
35
CJEU Rules of Procedure art.127(1).
36
K. Lenaerts, D. Arts and I. Maselis in Bray (ed), Procedural Law of the European Union, 2nd edn (006). p.365,
para.24-016.
37
Articles 93–94 of the Rules of Procedure, referring to art.23 of the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union.
38
D. Anderson and M. Demetriou, References to the European Court, 2nd edn (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2002),
para.7-039.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
29
39
Statute of the Court of Justice art.23.
40
References to the European Court, 2nd edn (2002), para.10-014.
41
K. Lenaerts, D. Arts and I. Maselis in Bray (ed), Procedural Law of the European Union, 2nd edn (London: Sweet &
Maxwell, 2006). p.365, para.25-009.
42
Procedural Law of the European Union, 2nd edn (2006), p.343.
43
B. Cairns, Australian Civil Procedure, 6th edn (Sydney: Thomson Lawbook Co, 2005), p.160. See, more recently, B.
Cairns, Australian Civil Procedure, 11th edn (Sydney: Thomson Reuters (Professional) Australia Pty Limited, 2016).
44
See further B. Cairns, Australian Civil Procedure, 11th edn (2016). See the illuminating report by Cairns and Williams
into the impact of the Uniform Civil Procedure Rules, Civil Litigation in Queensland (2007) 26 C.J.Q. 208.
45
Gould v Mount Oxide Mines Ltd (1916) 22 C.L.R. 490 at 517 (High Court of Australia).
46
Dare v Pulham (1982) 148 C.L.R. 658 at 664.
47
State Government Insurance Commission v Sharpe (1996) 126 F.L.R. 341 at 344.
48
Westbrook Resources Ltd v Globe Metallurgical Inc [2009] EWCA Civ 310; [2009] 2 All E.R. Comm 1060.
49
Westbrook Resources Ltd v Globe Metallurgical Inc [2009] EWCA Civ 310; [2009] 2 All ER Comm 1060 at [11].
50
The Prudential Assurance Company Ltd v Commissioners for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs [2016] EWCA Civ
376; [2017] 1 W.L.R. 4031 at [22].
51
Hopper Group Ltd v Parker (1987) 1 P.R.N.Z. 363 at 366.
52
See Pearce v Accident Compensation Corp (1991) 5 P.R.N.Z. 297.
53
The Laws of New Zealand (Wellington: Butterworths, 1995), Vol.5, para.83.
54
G.B. Born and J.R. Profaizer, “Pre-trial Proceedings in US Courts” in Blair (ed) Banks and Remedies, 2nd edn (London:
LLP, 1999), Ch.8.
55
Clausen & Sons Ltd v Theo Hamm Brewing Co (1968) 395 F.2d 388 at 390 (CA. Minn). For a contrary view, see Daves
v Hawaiian Dredging Co (1953) 114 F. Supp. 643 (DC Hawaii), where McLaughlin, Chief Judge, said that r.8 requires
“in a practical and sensible way, that he set out sufficient factual matter to outline the elements of his cause of action
or claim, proof of which is essential to his recovery”. See also R. Marcus, “The Revival of Fact Pleading Under the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure” 86 Colum. L. Rev. 433 (1986).
56
See, e.g. Rosen v Texas Co (1958) 161 F. Supp. 55 (SDNY), per Judge Dimmock; M.V. Ciresi, “The Courts and Pleadings
of the United States” in Jacob and Goldrein, Pleadings: Principles and Practice (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1990),
p.340.
57
Section 21D(9)(b)(2).
58
Especially as regards certain defences which must be asserted or they are otherwise waived: r.8(6) of the Federal
Procedural Rules.
59
James, Hazard and Leubsdorf, Civil Procedure, 5th edn (New York: Foundation Press, 2001).
60
McPhilemy v Times Newspapers Ltd [1999] 3 All E.R. 775. See also China Shipping Development Co Ltd v State Bank
of Sauravhta [2001] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 691 at 694.
61
McPhilemy v Times Newspapers Ltd [1999] 3 All E.R. 775 at 793.
62
Hague Plant Ltd v Hague [2015] C.P. Rep 14 at 76, per Christopher Clarke LJ.
63
Al-Medenni v Mars UK Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 1041 at [19].
64
Prudential Assurance Co Ltd [2017] 1 WLR 4031 at [22]–[24].
65
Standard Bank Plc v Via Mat International Ltd [2013] 2 All E.R. (Comm); Hague Plant Ltd v Hague [2015] C.P. Rep 14.
66
Tchenguiz v Grant Thornton UK LLP [2015] EWHC 405 (Comm) McPhilemy v Times Newspapers Ltd.
67
Tchenguiz v Grant Thornton UK LLP [2015] 1 All E.R. (Comm) 961 at [17].
68
Biguzzi v Rank Leisure Plc [1999] 1 W.L.R. 1926; [1999] 4 All E.R. 934. See also May LJ in Purdy v Cambran [2000]
C.P. Rep. 67.
69
J.A. Jolowicz On Civil Procedure (Cambridge University Press, 2000), p.9. For a previous example of the “clean slate”
approach to a new code, see Bank of England v Vagliano Bros [1891] A.C. 107 at 144–145, per Lord Herschell.
70
Zuckerman on Civil Procedure, 2nd edn (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2006).
71
See e.g. UCB Corporate Services Ltd v Halifax (SW) Ltd (2000) 1 E.G.L.R. 87; The Times, 23 December 1999, at [24],
Nomura International Plc v Granada Group Ltd [2007] EWHC 642 (Comm); [2007] 2 All E.R. (Comm) 878 at [25]–[26].
72
Jacob and Goldrein, Pleadings: Principles and Practice (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1990), p.128.
73
CPR r.3.4(2).
74
Harris v Bolt Burdon [2000] C.P. Rep. 70.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
30
75
White Book, paras 3.4.1 to 3.4.2. See also Nomura International Plc v Granada Group Ltd [2007] EWHC 642 (Comm);
[2007] 2 All E.R. (Comm) 878, where Cooke J struck out a claim because, at the time of issue, the claimant had no valid
basis to plead the requisite facts, and had issued protectively, to stop the running of the limitation period.
76
See, for example, the claimants’ reliance upon witness evidence in Tchenguiz v Grant Thornton UK LLP [2015] EWHC
405 (Comm).
77
CPR PD 3A, para.1.2.
78
CPR PD3A para.3.1.
79
White Book, Vol I, para.16.4.1.
80
See e.g. Biguzzi v Rank Leisure Plc [1999] 1 W.L.R. 1926; [1999] 4 All E.R. 934.
81
CPR r.1.1(2)(f).
82
Master or district judge.
83
Lord Woolf described the problem of the automatic strike out provision under the former County Court Rules as having
led to litigation “which was fought furiously on both sides: on behalf of the claimants to preserve their claim, and on
behalf of the defendant to bring the litigation to an end irrespective of the justice of the case”.
84
Biguzzi v Rank Leisure Plc [1999] 1 W.L.R. 1926; [1999] 4 All E.R. 934 at p.1933. See also McPhilemy v Times
Newspapers Ltd (No.2) [2001] 4 All E.R. 861.
85
See Fayed v United Kingdom (1994) 18 E.H.R.R. 393; Osman v United Kingdom (2000) 29 E.H.R.R. 245; Z v United
Kingdom [2002] 34 E.H.R.R. 3.
86
Kent v Griffiths [2001] Q.B. 36 CA at [38].
87
R. Cranston, How Law Works (OUP, 2006), pp.155–156. See also, for example, the comments of Simon J in a case
management conference, set out in EDO Technologies Ltd v Campaign to Smash EDO [2006] EWHC 598 (QBD) at [34].
88
Richardson v Glencore UK Ltd [2014] EWHC 3990 (Comm).
89
Access to Justice, Interim Report, pp.116 onwards.
90
White Book, para.18.0.2.
91
I.R. Scott, “Striking out Pleadings” (2000) 19 C.J.Q. 99.
92
Commercial Court Guide, sections D5 and D6 (since the 10th edition in 2017, the applicable Guide is known as the
Commercial Court Guide); see Scicluna v Zippy Stitch Ltd [2018] EWCA Civ 1320 on the importance of the list of
issues as a case management tool.
93
Skrzynski v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2014] EWCA Civ 9.
94
Jacob & Goldrein, Pleadings: Principles and Practice, p.3; and Philipps v Philipps (1878) 4 Q.B.D. 127 at 131, 133–134.
95
Blay v Pollard [1930] 1 K.B. 628 at 634, per Scrutton LJ. See also Waghorn v George Wimpey & Co Ltd [1969] 1 W.L.R.
1764; [1970] 1 All E.R. 474.
96
Belmont Finance Corp Ltd v Williams Furniture Ltd [1979] Ch. 250 at 269.
97
See, e.g. Ultraframe (UK) Ltd v Fielding [2005] EWHC 1638 (Ch), where Lewison J stated, at [120]: “Although I accept
that it would be wrong to construe a pleading like a statute, Ultraframe are limited to their pleaded case, fairly read.”
See also And see Commercial Court Guide, D6.5, which provides that if any question arises as to the accuracy of the
list of common ground and issues, the pleadings must be consulted to determine the issues in the case. See also Bruce
v TTA Management Ltd [2018] EWHC 2718 (Ch); Mukhtar v Saleem [2018] EWHC 1729 (QB).
98
As to which, see para.1-42.
99
See Barclays Bank v Boulter [1999] 1 W.L.R. 1919; [1999] 4 All E.R. 513.
100
Sivanandan v Executive Committee of Hackney Action for Racial Equality [2002] EWCA Civ 111.
101
Lombard North Central Plc v Automobile World (UK) Ltd [2010] EWCA Civ 20.
102
Dunnett v Railtrack Plc [2002] EWCA Civ 303.
103
Scottish Power UK Plc v Talisman North Sea Ltd [2016] EWHC 3569 (Comm).
104
Rule 22.1(4); PD 22 para.2.1 provides that the form of the statement of truth should be as follows: “[I believe] [the
(claimant or as may be) believes] that the facts stated in this [name of document being verified] are true.”
105
Where appropriate, the signatory may also be a litigation friend, insurer, managing agent, or trustee. An in-house lawyer,
who is not a solicitor, barrister, or other authorised litigator is not a recognised legal representative for the purposes of
signing a statement of truth. See generally PD 22 paras 3.1 to 3.7. CPR 22 PD paras 3.6A and 3.6B make provision for
someone other than a party to proceedings to sign a statement of case in limited circumstances.
106
PD 22 paras 3.4–5. The document must be signed by a “person holding a senior position”.
107
PD 22 paras 3.6.
108
See rr.32.4 and 32.15.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
31
109
Access to Justice, Interim Report, p.161.
110
Access to Justice, Interim Report, p.153.
111
Clarke v Marlborough Fine Art (London) Ltd [2002] 1 W.L.R. 1731 at 1742, per Patten J. See Malgar Ltd v RE Leach
(Engineering) Ltd [2000] C.P. Rep. 39 and Lexi Holdings Plc v Luqman [2008] EWHC 1639 (Ch). But see also, Sobrany
v UAB Transtira [2016] EWCA Civ 28; [2016] R.T.R. 18, where a defendant was permitted to advance a case inconsistent
with its pleading, relying upon evidence advanced by the claimant.
112
See Malgar Ltd v RE Leach (Engineering) Ltd [2000] C.P. Rep. 39 and Lexi Holdings Plc v Luqman [2008] EWHC
1639 (Ch).
113
See r.32.6(2)(a).
114
S. Sime, A Practical Approach to Civil Procedure, 17th edn (Oxford University Press, 2014) at para.14.15.
115
In Binks v Securicor Omega Express Ltd [2003] EWCA Civ 993; [2003] 1 W.L.R. 2557.
116
Binks v Securicor Omega Express Ltd [2003] 1 W.L.R. 2557 at [8], referring to Kelly v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police [2001] EWCA Civ 1632.
117
See, e.g. the Bar Standards Board Code of Conduct r.C9.2.
118
Commercial Court Guide D5 and D6.
119
RSC Ord.18, r.7(1). The form of words goes back to 1875, the words “and contain only” being added in 1883. In the
Commercial Court, it was specifically provided that pleadings “must be as brief as possible”: Ord.72, r.7. See also, the
Report and Recommendations of the Commercial Court Long Trials Working Party, which emphasised that statements
of case in that division should only contain “those facts that are needed to ensure that other parties know what case it is
they have to meet” (p.21), and stated that the requirements of RSC Ord.18, r.7(1) should remain the guiding principle for
pleadings. Statements of case in the Commercial Court should now be limited to 25 pages in length (and an application
must be made for permission for them to be longer): Commercial Court Guide, C1.2(a)).
120
McPhilemy v Times Newspapers Ltd [1999] 3 All E.R. 775 at 793. The italicisation of the word “concise” appears in
Lord Woolf MR’s judgment.
121
Morris v Bank of America National Trust [2000] 1 All E.R. 954 at 971, per Morritt LJ.
122
Dunn v Glass Systems (UK) Ltd [2007] EWHC B2 (QB).
123
Commercial Court Guide para.C1.2(a).
124
Standard Bank Plc v Via Mat International Ltd [2013] EWCA Civ 490, at [29], per Aikens LJ.
125
Access to Justice, Interim Report, Ch.20, para.19.
126
A general traverse is no longer permissible under CPR r.16.5(2)(a): see below. See Warner v Sampson [1959] 1 Q.B.
297 at 310–311 for an account of the “general traverse” (per Lord Denning). The Court of Appeal quashed the trial
judge’s decision to the effect that the “general traverse” in the defendant’s pleading resulted in the defendant’s forfeiting
a lease on the grounds of denial of the landlord’s title.
127
Access to Justice, Final Report, Ch.9, para.5.
128
Jacob & Goldrein, Pleadings: Principles and Practice, p.127. The rules were set out in RSC Ord.18, r.13.
129
There are two exceptions: where the allegation is inconsistent with the nature of the case in the defence, the defendant
is taken to require the allegation to be proved (r.16.5(3)); and as regards the quantum in money claims (r.16.5(4)), the
claimant will be required to prove allegations in the particulars of claim which are not dealt with in the defence.
130
Court Guide C1.1; Chancery Guide, App.2, paras 2–5.
131
Court Guide C1.(a). An application must be made to serve statements of case longer than 25 pages.
132
RSC Ord.18, r.7(1), quoted above at fn.115.
133
See Dicey & Morris, The Conflict of Laws, 15th edn (London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2014), para.9–003. The Commercial
Court Guide requires any allegation of foreign law to be stated with reference to any foreign legislation, legal decision
or legal texts relied upon (C1.3(f)).
134
Loveridge v Healey [2004] EWCA Civ 173; [2004] C.P. Rep. 30.
135
And in some cases required: See Commercial Court Guide Cl.3(d)–(e).
136
See Commercial Court Guide Cl.3(d)–(f). The Chancery Guide, para.2.8 provides that points of law may be set out but
that any point to be taken under the Human Rights Act must be set out in a statement of case.
137
D (A Child) v Walker [2000] 1 W.L.R. 1382; [2000] C.P.L.R. 462, per Lord Woolf MR.
138
R v NW Lancashire HA [2000] 1 W.L.R. 977 at 1003, per Buxton LJ, with whom May LJ agreed.
139
The Chancery Guide explicitly provides that parties should not attach copies of documents if they are bulky: para.10.16.
140
The Chancery Guide explicitly provides that parties should not attach copies of documents if they are bulky: para.2.11.
141
Commercial Court Guide, C1.4(b) and (d)

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
32
142
Chancery Guide, App.2 C1.1(e).
143
Chancery Guide, App.2, para.12.
144
Morris v Bank of America National Trust [2000] 1 All E.R. 954 at 971, per Morritt LJ.
145
McPhilemy v Times Newspapers Ltd [1999] 3 All E.R. 775 at 792–793.
146
Zuckerman on Civil Procedure (2006), para.6.3. See further, in relation to the impact of preaction protocols, Cranston,
How Law Works (2006), at pp.150–151, who observes that they represent a “radical innovation in procedure,”
emphasising “party cooperation, [in] a distinct break from the adversary culture”.
147
Rixon v Chief Constable of Kent, The Times, 11 April 2000, CA.
148
Day v Garrett (1878) 7 Ch. D. 473 at 489.
149
Three Rivers DC v Governor and Company of the Bank of England [2001] UKHL 16.
150
At [183]–[190]. See, more recently, JSC Bank of Moscow v Kekhman [2015] EWHC 3073 (Comm).
151
See para.C1.2(c)(i) and (ii) of Commercial Court Guide, and para.2.6 of Chancery Guide.
152
Medcalf v Mardell [2002] 3 W.L.R. 172.
153
per Lord Bingham at [22]. A number of cases—particularly arising in the context of wasted costs and amendment
applications—have followed and clarified the decision in Medcalf, including Hersi & Co Solicitors v The Lord
Chancellor [2018] EWHC 946 (QB); LBI HF (formerly Landsbanki hf) v Stanford [2014] EWHC 2916 (Ch); Hussain
v Sarkar [2010] EWCA Civ 301 and Brown v Bennett (No.2) [2002] 1 W.L.R. 713.
154
Hague Plant Ltd v Hague [2015] C.P. Rep 14 at [76].
155
This term has replaced the former terms “writ” and “summons”.
156
PD 7 para.3.1.
157
Rule 8.1(2)(a).
158
Rule 16.3(3).
159
Rule 16.3(4).
160
Rule 16.3(6).
161
Rule 16.3(7).
162
PD 7 para.3.5. Convention territory means the territory of a Contracting State as defined by s.1(3) of the Civil Jurisdiction
and Judgments Act 1982.
163
Rule 16.4(1)(a). Where a claim has been bought against more than one defendant using a single claim form, but alleging
distinct causes of action against them, a claimant can serve separate particulars of claim against different defendants:
Tetra Pak Ltd v Biddle & Co (A Firm) [2010] 1 W.L.R. 1466.
164
Rule 16.4(1)(c).
165
Rule 16.4(2).
166
PD 16 para.8.2(1)–(7). A similar requirement was found in RSC Ord.18, r.12(a), albeit illegality was not included.
167
RSC Ord.18, r.12(a): illegality was not included in the old list.
168
PD 16 para.8.2(8).
169
PD 16 para.7.3.
170
PD 16 para.7.4.
171
PD 16 para.13.3.
172
PD 16 para.4.
173
PD 16 para.5.
174
PD 16 para.6.
175
Rule 16.5(2)(b).
176
Rule 16.5(5).
177
Known as the “general traverse”.
178
Rule 16.5(4).
179
Rule 1.1.
180
SPI North Ltd v Swiss Post International (UK) Ltd [2019] EWCA Civ 7; [2019] 1 W.L.R. 2865.
181
PD16 para.13.1.
182
PD16 para.13.2, r.37.3 and PD 37 para.2.
183
PD16 para.12.
184
PD16 para.15.

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
33
185
PD 13 para.3.
186
Rule 16.6.
187
Rule 16.7(1).
188
Rule 16.7(2).
189
A common form of pleading was, e.g. “save insofar as the same consists of admissions and save as expressly admitted
below, the Plaintiff joins issue with the Defendant on his Defence.” The term “joins issue” should be avoided in any
event, since it is not found anywhere in the CPR.
190
White Book, para.16.7.5.
191
This continues the former procedure. For an illustration, see Tito v Waddell (No.2) [1977] Ch. 106.
192
For the full definition of this term, see r.20.2.
193
Bramley and Gouge, The Civil Justice Reforms One Year On (London: Butterworths, 2000), pp.55–56.
194
Rule 20.3(1).
195
PD 20 para.6.1.
196
PD 20 para.6.2.
197
Rule 20.5(1).
198
Rule 20.5(2).
199
Under PD 20 para.2.1 that evidence should set out (a) the stage which the proceedings have reached, (b) the nature of
the additional claim or the question or issue that needs to be decided, (c) a summary of the facts on which the additional
claim is based and (d) the name and address of the proposed additional parties.
200
Rule 20.4(2)(a).
201
Rule 20.7(3).
202
Rule 20.6.
203
Rule 20.6(2).
204
Replacing the former “third Party notice”.
205
PD 20 para.7.
206
PD 20 para.4.1.
207
PD 18 para.4.
208
White Book, para.18.1.5.
209
Rule 18.1(1).
210
White Book, para.18.0.2.
211
i.e. the party making the request.
212
PD 18 para.1.2. For an application of this test to a particularly weighty Request see Lexi Holdings (In Administration)
v Pannone & Partners [2010] EWHC 1416 (Ch).
213
Under r.1.1.(2)(c), the court should deal with the case in ways which are proportionate “(i) to the amount of money
involved; (ii) to the importance of the case; (iii) to the complexity of the issues; and (iv) to the financial position of
each party”.
214
PD 18 para.1.4.
215
Amendment under the former procedure was dealt with in RSC Ord.20.
216
Formerly dealt with in RSC Ord.15.
217
Commercial Court Guide para.C5.
218
PD 17 para.2.2.
219
Rule 17.1(1).
220
Under the former procedure, a party was free to amend any pleading once at any time before close of pleadings: RSC
Ord.20, r.3.
221
Rules 17.1(3) and 19.4.
222
Rules 17.4(2).
223
Rules 17.4(3).
224
Rules 17.4(4).
225
Rules 19.5.
226
Rule 1.1(2); r.1.2.
227
Rules 1.4(2)(b). There is a power to exclude issues from consideration: r.3.1(k).

Chapter 1 - Introduction, UKBC-BULLENL 459370686 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
34
228
See, e.g. Woods v Chaleff unreported 28 May 1999 (amendment refused six days before trial). However, see also Cobbold
v London Borough of Greenwich unreported 9 August 1999 for a case in which amendment was allowed the day before
trial. For late amendments in general see CPR para.17. Note 17.3.7.
229
Zuckerman on Civil Procedure (2006), para.6.43.
230
Hague Plant Ltd v Hague [2015] C.P. Rep 14.
231
SX Holdings Ltd v Synchronet Ltd & Aver, The Times, 10 October 2000.
232
White Book, para.17.3.6.
233
Charlesworth v Relay Roads Ltd [2000] 1 W.L.R. 230; [1999] 4 All E.R. 397, Neuberger J, where the earlier authorities
are cited.
234
EDO Technology Ltd v Campaign to Smash EDO [2006] EWHC 598 (QB) at [46].
235
cf. State of Queensland v JL Holdings [1999] C.P.L.R. 1; [1999] C.L.Y.B. 498 (High Court of Australia), in which it
was held that concerns over case management should not take precedence over allowing access to justice where there
is an arguable defence to be put forward by amendment.
236
AC Electrical Wholesale Plc v IGW Services Ltd, The Times, 10 October 2000.
237
Charlesworth v Relay Roads Ltd [2000] 1 W.L.R. 230; [1999] 4 All E.R. 397.
238
Limitation Act 1980 s.35(1). But this does affect costs and allocation issues: White Book, para.17.3.4.
239
International Distillers and Vintners Ltd v JF Hillebrand (UK) Ltd, The Times, 25 January 2000.
240
Conticorp SA v The Central Bank of Ecuador [2007] UKPC 40—decided under Bahamian law, but the same principles
apply under the CPR. See, in relation to these Hoechst UK Ltd v IRC [2003] EWHC 1002 (Ch) at [22]–[23].
241
Maridive & Oil Services SAE v CNA Insurance Co (Europe) Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 369.
242
La Chemise Lacoste SA v Sketchers USA Ltd [2006] EWHC 3642 (Ch), per Mann J at [12].
243
See paras 2.8–2.13 and especially App.2.
244
10th edn, 2017.
245
See especially r.62.4, 62.15.
246
rr.59.4 and 59.9.
247
See paras 7.2 and 9.
248
64BPD.2.
249
Richard Hanke, Ian Wilson, Laura John and Adam Zellick made valuable contributions to this section as published in
previous editions which we gratefully acknowledge.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
