To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: making of the contract
Defences under ss.62 and 63 of the CCA and the Regulations
Version 2: to be used for agreements made where CCA s.61A applies
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
The Defendant denies that the document referred to in the Particulars of Claim constitutes a valid agreement enforceable
by the Claimant.
2.
The document purports to be an agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and is subject to
CCA s.61A.
3.
The document was not a properly executed agreement in that:
 
(a)Contrary to CCA s.61A(1) the Claimant failed to give the Defendant a copy of the executed agreement [failed to
give the Defendant a document referred to in the executed agreement namely …]
 
(b)Contrary to CCA s.61A(2) and (3), although a copy of the unexecuted agreement had been furnished to the
Defendant, following execution of the agreement the Claimant failed to inform him in writing that the agreement had
been executed and/or that the executed agreement was in identical terms to the unexecuted agreement and/or that the
Claimant had a right to receive a copy of the executed agreement on request.
 
(c)Contrary to CCA s.61A(3), the Defendant having requested a copy of the executed agreement under CCA s.61A(3)
(c), the Claimant failed to give him a copy either without delay or at all.
4.
In the premises, the purported agreement is not enforceable by the Claimant against the Defendant.
[Statement of truth]

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
