To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: events after the making of the contract
Defence relating to open-end consumer credit agreements under CCA s.98A
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
20-F63
The Defendant admits he entered into the agreement referred to in the Particulars of Claim. The agreement was an
agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”).
2.
The agreement was an open-end consumer credit agreement within the meaning of CCA s.98A.
3.
The purported termination of the agreement set out in paragraph … of the Particulars of Claim was invalid in that the
Claimant failed to give written notice of termination to the Defendant alternatively the purported notice of termination
given to the Defendant did not provide for the agreement to terminate after the expiry of two months from the date of notice.
Alternatively
3.
Wrongfully and in breach of CCA s.98A, the Claimant’s purported termination or suspension of the Defendant’s right to
draw on the credit was unlawful in that the Claimant failed to give written notice thereof alternatively gave a purported
notice which did not give reasons for such termination or suspension alternatively gave a purported notice giving reasons
which were not objectively justified.
4.
In the circumstances, the Defendant was entitled to continue to draw upon the credit and, provided that the Defendant
complied with the conditions of the agreement (as he has done) the Claimant was not entitled to call in or recover the
moneys claimed in the Particulars of Claim.
[Statement of truth]

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
