Claim for rescission of security granted on grounds of..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for rescission of security granted on grounds of undue
influence of a third party (presumption, constructive notice)
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 18 - Undue Influence
Claim for rescission of security granted on grounds of undue influence of a third party (presumption, constructive
notice)
1.
18-E3
The Claimant is an artist and works from home. Dr A is a doctor in private practice at [address]. The Claimant is a patient
of Dr A and had been a patient of his for 25 years at the time she executed the Guarantee.
2.
Dr A banks at the [..........] branch of B Bank, the second Defendant.
3.
On or about [date], the Claimant executed an unlimited guarantee (“the Guarantee”) of the liabilities of Dr A’s medical
partnership to the second Defendant. A copy of the Guarantee 64  is attached to the Particulars of Claim and marked “A”.
Undue Influence of first Defendant
4.
As a result of the relationship between the Claimant and the first Defendant, namely that of doctor and patient, it is to be
presumed that the first Defendant had influence over the Claimant and that the Claimant reposed trust and confidence in
the first Defendant. [Although the presumption can generally be relied on, insert any particulars of actual undue influence]
5.
The execution of the Guarantee is not a transaction which can be readily explained by the relationship of the parties. In
particular, but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing:
 
(i)At no time has the Claimant been financially interested in the medical practice of Dr A.
 
(ii)The Guarantee was unlimited in scope or amount.
 
(iii)The liabilities of Dr A’s medical practice amounted (although the Claimant did not know this at the time she
executed the Guarantee) to £750,000 at the date of execution of the Guarantee.

Claim for rescission of security granted on grounds of..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
6.
The execution of the Guarantee was procured by the undue influence of the first Defendant.
Position of Bank
7.
The second Defendant had constructive notice of the undue influence exercised by the first Defendant over the Claimant.
Particulars of constructive notice
 
(i)The second Defendant had notice from the face of the Guarantee itself, where the Claimant signed her name and
added “patient of Dr A” on the form of Guarantee.
 
(ii)Dr A himself told the manager at the [..........] branch of the second Defendant that he had “exhausted family
members” in his search to find a surety and “would have to turn to his wealthy patients instead”.
8.
Further or alternatively, the relationship between the Claimant and the first Defendant was not commercial in nature. The
second Defendant failed to take any, or any adequate, steps to bring home to the Claimant the risk she was running by
standing as surety for the debts of the first Defendant and/or the nature and effect of the transaction.
9.
In particular, but without prejudice to the generality of the above, the second Defendant failed to satisfy itself that the
Claimant had received independent legal advice before executing the Guarantee.
10.
As a consequence of the facts and matters set out above, the second Defendant had constructive notice of the exercise of
undue influence by the first Defendant over the Claimant.
11.
By letter dated [date], the Claimant rescinded the Guarantee; alternatively, does so by service of these Particulars of Claim.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)A declaration that the Guarantee has been rescinded/set aside as having been procured by the undue influence of
the first Defendant and that the second Defendant had constructive notice of such undue influence.
 
(2)An order that the second Defendant do deliver up the Guarantee to be cancelled forthwith.

Claim for rescission of security granted on grounds of..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Footnotes
64
Attach to the Particulars of Claim here any other contractual documents relied on.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
