The Consumer Credit Act 1974, UKBC-BULLENL 459371790 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
The Consumer Credit Act 1974
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Defences
The Consumer Credit Act 1974
20-54
The formalities required for the formation and enforcement of a regulated agreement are so complex that there is a high risk of
the creditor or owner infringing the rules and opening the way for the debtor or hirer to claim that the agreement is unenforceable.
The fact that there are now three different sets of rules governing the form and content of regulated agreements has only added
to the problem.
It must be emphasised, however, that the CCA has not done away with the need to consider contractual defences in cases
involving agreements regulated by the CCA, and such defences will frequently be more important than the technical defences.
Even where the debtor or hirer may have a defence arising from a breach of the CCA, if there is a defence on the real merits
of the action, it is always wise to give such a defence prominence because there is a natural reluctance on the part of judges to
accede to strictly technical defences when the defendant is otherwise wholly unmeritorious.
Defences under the CCA fall into five main areas:
 
1.Defences arising out of events before the contract is made (e.g. that the creditor or credit-broker was not the holder of
the proper licence or FCA authorisation) or that the creditor failed to provide the requisite pre-contract information).
 
2.Defences arising out of the making of the agreement, in particular defences arising out of non-compliance with the
regulations concerning the form and content of regulated agreements, failure to give notices such as cancellation notices
and failure to provide the correct copies.
 
3.Defences arising out of events after the making of the contract such as those based on failure by the creditor to provide
statutory statements (much strengthened by the 2006 Act and by the implementation of the Directive) and default notices
(prior to enforcement notices) introduced by the 2006 Act.
 
4.Defences arising from breaches of the rules governing enforcement by the creditor such as those prescribing the form
and content of default notices and statement of the time given to the debtor to comply.
 
5.Extortionate credit bargains and unfair relationships.
Time orders
20-55
Even where the defendant has no defence to the claim either on its merits or on technical grounds under the CCA, he may be able
to seek a time order under the CCA 1974 s.129. Whether or not the creditor’s claim is admitted, it would seem good practice
for the debtor to include the application for such an order in a counterclaim. This is subject to procedural rules whether made
as a free-standing claim by the debtor or hirer, or in proceedings brought against him by the creditor or owner (see para.20-47,
under Category 5).

The Consumer Credit Act 1974, UKBC-BULLENL 459371790 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Time orders were enlarged by the 2006 Act. The new requirements for the creditor or owner to serve a notice of default once
the debtor or hirer reaches specified levels of default (even if he does not intend to enforce the agreement at that stage) mean
that a debtor or hirer who is served with such a notice may pre-empt enforcement by making his own application for a time
order under s.129A of the CCA (introduced by s.16 of the 2006 Act).
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
