To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Seller’s Defences
Defence based on an exemption clause where the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 can apply but neither the Unfair
Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999 nor the Consumer Rights Act 2015 applies
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate document
1.
25-F51
The Defendant admits that it entered into the written contract with the Claimant annexed to the Claim Form whereby the
Defendant agreed to sell and deliver the goods referred to in the Particulars of Claim.
2.
By clause 6 of the contract, all conditions and warranties as to the condition, fitness or quality of the goods or as to their
conformity with any description or sample were excluded and the Defendant will rely upon that clause as validly excluding
the terms alleged by the Claimant to be implied terms of the contract in paragraphs X, Y and Z of the Particulars of Claim.
3.
It is admitted that the contract was concluded in the Defendant’s written standard terms of business and that the Unfair
Contract Terms Act 1977, ss.3 and 6 apply to the contract.
4.
The Claimant is not and did not deal as a consumer.
5.
The Defendant will say that it is reasonable for it to rely on clause 6 as excluding the said alleged terms.
Particulars
 
(a)the strengths of the parties’ bargaining positions were unequal in that [set out why the Claimant’s position is said
to have been stronger];
 
(b)the Claimant was able to purchase identical goods from XY Limited on terms which did not include any clause
excluding conditions or warranties;
 
(c)the Claimant knew of the existence of clause 6 because the Defendant expressly drew its attention to the clause in
a letter dated [date] (copy annexed to this Defence);
 
(d)the goods were manufactured to the special order of the Claimant [details].

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
6.
Alternatively, if, which is denied, the Defendant is not entitled to rely upon clause 6 and the Claimant establishes that the
contract was subject to the said terms or terms to a similar effect, the Defendant denies that it was in breach of those terms
either as alleged in the Particulars of Claim or at all.
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9]
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
