Impact of the United Kingdom’s Withdrawal from the UK (Brexit), UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Impact of the United Kingdom’s Withdrawal from the UK
(Brexit)
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 12 - Financial Services
Impact of the United Kingdom’s Withdrawal from the UK (Brexit)
12-08
At the time of writing, it is not clear whether or not the UK will leave the EU with a deal on 31 January 2020 (exit day).
However, what is clear is that the UK Government’s approach is that the existing financial services framework will, as far as
possible, continue to apply after Brexit. As part of the preparation for Brexit, the UK Parliament passed the European Union
(Withdrawal) Act 2018 (EUWA). The EUWA will repeal the European Communities Act 1972 on exit day (unless a deal 126
or an extension to the art.50 127  process is agreed), preserve existing UK laws which implement EU obligations and convert
existing directly applicable EU law at the point of exit into UK law (the “retained EU law”). The EUWA also gives ministers
the power to make secondary legislation to amend the retained EU law to ensure it functions effectively when the UK leaves
the EU. To this end, a number of statutory instruments have been made, including the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000
(Amendment) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 (SI 2019/632) (not yet in force) which, inter alia, amends FSMA and the RAO to
reflect the UK’s position (post Brexit) as a standalone regulatory regime outside of the EU’s single market for financial services
(for example, by amending references to EU legislation and amending definitions which are dependent on provisions in EU
legislation, or use definitions based on an activity being carried out within the single market).
Footnotes
126
If a deal with a transitional agreement extending the time that EU law applies is agreed, an Act of Parliament will be
required to provide for changes to the EUWA to save the effect of the European Communities Act 1972 during that
period.
127
Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
