Claim against the bank as a constructive trustee, UKBC-BULLENL 459370995 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim against the bank as a constructive trustee
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 9 - Banking
Claim against the bank as a constructive trustee
1.
9-E12
The Defendant is a bank.
2.
The Claimant is a company. The Claimant held an account with the XY Bank (“the Company Account”).
3.
AB is a director of the Claimant. AB held an account with the Defendant (“the Director’s Account”). [At all material times
the Director’s Account was overdrawn, with a debit balance of at least £[..........].] 131
4.
Between [dates], AB withdrew a total of £[..........] from the Company Account without the authority of the Claimant, by
drawing cheques on the Company Account made payable to himself, and paid these cheques into the Director’s Account.
5.
In so doing, AB was acting in breach of the fiduciary duties he owed to the Claimant as director. [Set out particulars.]
6.
The Defendant thereby received this sum of £[..........] [in partial discharge of the overdraft on the Director’s Account and
for its own benefit].
7.
The Defendant knew that the £[..........] received by the Defendant was or represented property which was the subject
of fiduciary duties owed by AB to the Claimant, and knew that in effecting the withdrawals referred to above, AB was
acting in breach of those fiduciary duties, [set out particulars of knowledge], such that it would be unconscionable for the
Defendant to retain the benefit of the receipt.
8.
Further or alternatively, the Defendant assisted AB’s breach of fiduciary duty in honouring the Cheques in circumstances
where the Defendant’s conduct was dishonest by the ordinary standards of reasonable and honest bankers [Set out
particulars of dishonesty].

Claim against the bank as a constructive trustee, UKBC-BULLENL 459370995 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)A declaration that the Defendant is liable as constructive trustee for the knowing receipt of property subject to
fiduciary duties and is liable to account to the Claimant in respect of such receipt;
 
(2)Further or alternatively, a declaration that the Defendant is liable as constructive trustee for having dishonestly
assisted in a breach of fiduciary duty and is liable to account to the Claimant in respect of such assistance;
 
(3)£[..........] or such other sums as the Court shall determine are payable by the Defendant to the Claimant;
 
(4)Interest on such sums at such rate for such period as the Court shall determine pursuant to s.35A of the Senior
Courts Act 1981 and/or the equitable jurisdiction of the Court.
Footnotes
131
If the account is in credit, there can be no knowing receipt claim: see the commentary at the start of this section.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
