When the “Consumer Credit Act Procedure” (“CCA..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
When the “Consumer Credit Act Procedure” (“CCA Procedure”)
applies
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
When the “Consumer Credit Act Procedure” (“CCA Procedure”) applies
20-40
Under CPR PD7B, CCA Procedure must be applied to:
“claims made under the following sections of the CCA:
 
(1)s.141 (claim by the creditor to enforce regulated agreement relating to goods etc)
 
(2)s.129 (claim by debtor or hirer for a time order)
 
(3)s.90 (creditor’s claim for an order for recovery of protected goods)
 
(4)s.92(1) (creditor’s or owner’s claim to enter premises to take possession of goods)
 
(5)s.140B(2)(a) (debtor’s or surety’s application for an order relating to an unfair relationship)
 
(6)creditor’s or owner’s claim for a court order to enforce a regulated agreement relating to goods or money
where the court order is required by—
 
(a)s.65(1) (improperly-executed agreement),
 
(b)s.86(2) (death of debtor or hirer where agreement is partly secured or unsecured),
 
(c)s.111(2) (default notice etc not served on surety),
 
(d)s.124(1) or (2) (taking of a negotiable instrument in breach of terms of s.123), or
 
(e)s.105(7)(a) or (b) (security not expressed in writing, or improperly executed).”
Paragraph 3.2 excludes from the Practice Direction claims relating to the recovery of land and paragraph 3.3 excludes
claims “made by the creditor under s.141 of the CCA to enforce a regulated agreement where the agreement relates only to
money” (which “must be started by the issue of a Part 7 claim form”).
These provisions are not easy to fathom. For a start claims are not made under s.141. The purpose of this section is to provide
that all claims by creditors or owners to enforce regulated agreements or related securities must be brought in the county court.
Thus, presumably, CCA Procedure applies to all claims by creditors or owners except those excluded by para.3.3. In that case
why bother to make special provision for claims under ss.90 and 92 or for enforcement claims which must be included under
the catch-all provision relating to s.141?
20-41
More problematical is the application of para.3.3. What is an agreement “relating only to money”? Does this include a debtor-
creditor-supplier agreement where, for example, the creditor has made a loan to the debtor for the specific purpose of purchasing
identified goods or services?

When the “Consumer Credit Act Procedure” (“CCA..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
These are not the sneers (however justified) of the practitioner at the expense of the draughtsman. These uncertainties were
already causing considerable practical problems at the date of the 14th edition of this work and, five editions on, still remain
unresolved.
The editors of this part of the work will proceed on the assumption that all regulated loan agreements (including credit-token
agreements) are exempted by para.3.3 of the Practice Direction from CCA Procedure.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
