Claim for damages for negligence against an architect, UKBC-BULLENL 459373415...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for damages for negligence against an architect
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 2
Part Y - Professional Negligence
Chapter 85 - Professional Negligence
Claim for damages for negligence against an architect
1.
85-Y3
The Defendant is and was at all material times an architect carrying on his practice under the name and style of [name]
at [address].
2.
At all material times, the Claimant was the owner of premises, being a residential home, situated at [address].
3.
On or about [date], the parties entered into an agreement whereby the Defendant undertook for payment to design and
supervise the construction of a warehouse.
4.
The agreement between the parties was made partly orally and partly in writing. In so far as it was oral, certain terms
and conditions were agreed on [date] between the Claimant and the Defendant, and in so far as it was in writing, it was
contained in or is evidenced by the letters dated [date] between the parties, and the outline plans and specifications enclosed
which are dated [date].
5.
The following were the material express, alternatively implied terms and conditions of the agreement, and the Defendant
thereby warranted that:
 
(a)he would exercise all reasonable care and skill, as an architect in and about the design and the supervision of the
construction of the premises;
 
(b)he would prepare all necessary plans, specifications, bills of quantities, forms of tender and contracts for the design
and construction of the premises;
 
(c)for the purposes of such preparations, he would make and carry out all the usual and necessary surveys,
examinations and inquiries;
 
(d)he would insert in the plans, specifications and contracts all proper and necessary provisions for the due execution
of the work and for the safety, stability and utility of the premises as a warehouse for the storage of goods;
 
(e)he would superintend the carrying out of the work of construction by the contractors employed for the purpose and
would act as architect under the contract with such contractors.

Claim for damages for negligence against an architect, UKBC-BULLENL 459373415...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
6.
In the circumstances, the Defendant was under a duty of care to the Claimant to ensure that he carried out his obligations
with the reasonable care and skill to be expected of an architect.
7.
At all material times, the Defendant well knew that the Claimant required the warehouse to be so designed and constructed
that it might serve as a place storing antiques and furniture at a profit and the Claimant required that state-of-the-art and
efficient air-conditioning, suitable for the safe storage of such items, be incorporated in the structure, and that the work of
construction to be completed not later than [date] to enable him to open the warehouse on that date.
8.
In purported performance of his employment, the Defendant prepared plans, specifications, bills of quantities, forms of
tender and a contract under which Messrs XY Ltd, building contractors, agreed to carry out the work of construction of
the premises, and the Defendant purported to superintend the carrying out of the work; and the Claimant paid the sum
of £[..........] to Messrs XY Ltd in respect of the work carried out by them and the sum of £[..........] to the Defendant in
respect of his fees.
9.
The Defendant has acted in breach of the agreement and of its terms, conditions, and warranties, and he has been in breach
of his duty of care in the performance of his services.
Particulars
 
(a)He designed the basement of the warehouse so that the same or the floor and part thereof were below the level of
the sewers and below the level at which the soil was waterlogged and flooded.
 
(b)He failed to provide for any, or in the alternative, any proper or sufficient, means of keeping out the water and
preventing the basement from being flooded.
 
(c)He failed to provide for any or any adequate or effective means of draining the basement or of getting rid of any
water that accumulated or collected there.
 
(d)He designed the air-conditioning system of the building in a manner that they failed to achieve the high standard
required for the storage of antiques and furniture.
 
(e)He failed to incorporate in his design for the warehouse a state-of-the-art and efficient air-conditioning system,
suitable for the safe storage of such items.
 
(f)He failed to superintend the construction of the works properly or at all or to ascertain and remedy the absence of
effective means to carry out the necessary draining and the high standard of air-conditioning required.
 
(g)He failed to require the contractors to make any provision for keeping out and getting rid of water.
 
(h)He failed to provide any proper precaution against infiltration of water; the only provision he made in the
specification was cement rendering, which would have been wholly ineffectual; and even this precaution he allowed
the builder to omit.
 
(i)He failed to supervise properly or at all the installation of the airconditioning system, alternatively he failed to
intervene and correct the builder at a time when the design in the air-conditioning system, or the method of its
installation could have been remedied.
 
(j)During the course of the works, he substituted for one of the original plans another plan which omitted the cement
rendering, which was the only precaution (if any) that he had provided against the water.

Claim for damages for negligence against an architect, UKBC-BULLENL 459373415...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
 
(k)He failed to insert in the contract a proper liquidated damages clause to provide that the contractors should pay
damages if they delayed the works beyond a specified date.
 
(l)He failed to take any or any adequate steps to ensure that the work of reconstruction would be completed not later
than [date].
10.
In the circumstances, he failed to exercise any or any reasonable care and skill.
11.
By reason of these matters, the premises as so designed and constructed under the supervision of the Defendant contained
serious and substantial defects which prevented the premises from being used as a warehouse for the storage of antiques
and furniture, and the works of construction were delayed for a period of 20 weeks beyond the date when they should
have been completed.
Particulars of Defects
 
(a)The basement has been and is liable to be flooded and is useless, and no means, except pumping, existed for getting
away the water.
 
(b)The joints in the brickwork were open, and the mortar had been and was being washed out.
 
(c)The air-conditioning system did not work at all, alternatively it did not work throughout the building, and/or where
it did provide some air-conditioning, it was to an inadequate standard unsuited to the storage of antiques and furniture.
12.
As a result of such breaches of contract and duty:
 
(a)The builders delayed the completion of the works.
 
(b)The failure of the air-conditioning system prevented the Claimant from opening the warehouse, as planned, a week
after the building was supposed to have been completed.
 
(c)A completely new air-conditioning system had to be designed and installed by specialist air-conditioning
contractors, involving the builders in additional work in re-opening and re-doing the work that had already been done.
 
(d)As a result, the opening of the warehouse for business was delayed by 6 months.
 
(e)A month after the Claimant commenced the business of warehousing antiques and furniture, a flood occurred in
the basement destroying the goods there stored, and damaging the building itself.
 
(f)The Claimant has been unable to recover any liquidated damages from the builders by reason of their delay in the
completion of the works.
 
(g)The Claimant has been compelled to employ and pay other contractors to reinstate the premises and tend to remedy
the defects and the damage caused by the flooding.
 
(h)The Claimant has lost profits he would otherwise have made in carrying on the business of an antiques and furniture
warehouse.
 
(i)The Claimant has lost the value of half the goods and furniture stored in the basement.
 
(j)The Claimant has been put to greater trouble, inconvenience and expense, and he has thereby suffered loss and
damage.
Particulars of Loss and Damage
[Set out in full detail the nature and extent of the loss and damage claimed.]

Claim for damages for negligence against an architect, UKBC-BULLENL 459373415...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
4
9.
Further, the Claimant claims interest upon all sums recovered pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 at such rate
and for such period as the Court shall deem appropriate.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Damages.
 
(2)Interest on damages pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
