Claim for rescission of security granted to creditor on..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for rescission of security granted to creditor on grounds
that of undue influence of a third party (no presumptions)
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 18 - Undue Influence
Claim for rescission of security granted to creditor on grounds that of undue influence of a third party (no
presumptions)
1.
18-E2
The Claimant is aged 78 years and is the father of the first Defendant. The first Defendant is the sole director of and
shareholder in a company, G Limited.
2.
On or about [date], the Claimant executed an unlimited guarantee (“the Guarantee”) of the liabilities of G Limited to B
Bank Plc. A copy of the Guarantee 63  is attached to these Particulars of Claim and marked “A”.
Undue Influence of first Defendant
3.
The execution of the Guarantee by the Claimant was procured by the undue influence of the first Defendant over the
Claimant.
Particulars of undue influence
[Set out in full detail, in short and simple sentences, the influence exerted on the Claimant and why in law it can be said
to be undue and that the Claimant had no means to resist the influence]
 
(i)The first Defendant is the son of the Claimant.
 
(ii)On or about [date] the first Defendant arrived at the Claimant’s home with a bundle of papers which he told the
Claimant to sign.
 
(iii)The Claimant, who was then 76 years old, partially sighted and suffering from chronic heart disease, was unwilling
to sign the papers (which included the Guarantee) and asked his son, the first Defendant to explain the significance
of the papers to him.
 
(iv)When it became clear to the first Defendant that the Claimant was unwilling to sign (among other documents)
the Guarantee, the first Defendant became threatening and abusive and told the Claimant that he would not leave the
house until the documents, including the Guarantee were signed by him.

Claim for rescission of security granted to creditor on..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(v)Further, the first Defendant threatened that the Claimant would be denied access to his granddaughter (the first
Defendant’s daughter) unless he signed the Guarantee.
 
(vi)The Claimant was alone in the house and had no opportunity to consult an independent legal adviser; further, the
Claimant feared for his own state of health.
4.
Further, one of the documents signed by the Claimant at the same time as the Guarantee was B Bank’s “waiver form”
which purported to waive the requirement that a guarantor should have taken independent legal advice before signing the
guarantee. A copy of the purported waiver is attached to the Particulars of Claim and marked “B”.
5.
The undue influence of the Defendant caused the Claimant to enter into the Guarantee.
Position of Bank
6.
B Bank had actual notice of the actual undue influence exercised by the first Defendant over the Claimant.
Particulars of actual notice
 
(i)A few days after the Claimant had signed the Guarantee, the Claimant consulted his lawyer about what the first
Defendant had done.
 
(ii)The Claimant’s lawyer immediately contacted the manager of the Claimant’s branch of B Bank, (a Mr K) and
told him, as agent of B Bank, of the circumstances in which the Guarantee and the waiver came to be signed by the
Claimant.
 
(iii)Mr K assured the Claimant’s lawyer that the Guarantee had not been returned to the Bank by the second Defendant
and that no facilities had yet been advanced to G Limited, but that, when the first Defendant returned the Guarantee,
the second Defendant would destroy it and would not rely on it.
 
(iv)Accordingly, the second Defendant had actual notice of the circumstances of the undue influence exercised by
the Defendant over the Claimant.
7.
Further or alternatively, the second Defendant had constructive notice of the undue influence. The relationship between the
Claimant and the first Defendant was not commercial in nature. The second Defendant failed to take any, or any adequate,
steps to bring home to the Claimant the risk he was running by standing as surety for the debts of G Limited and/or the
nature and effect of the transaction.
8.

Claim for rescission of security granted to creditor on..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
In particular, but without prejudice to the generality of the above, the second Defendant failed to satisfy itself that the
Claimant had received independent legal advice before executing the Guarantee.
9.
As a consequence of the failures set out above, the second Defendant had constructive notice of the exercise of undue
influence by the first Defendant over the Claimant and the Claimant is entitled to have the Guarantee rescinded and/or set
aside as against the second Defendant.
10
The second Defendant had actual notice further or alternatively constructive notice of the undue influence exercised by
the first Defendant over the Claimant in order to procure the execution of the Guarantee by the Claimant.
11.
By letter dated [date], the Claimant rescinded the Guarantee; alternatively does so by service of these Particulars of Claim.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)A declaration that the Guarantee be rescinded/set aside as having been procured by undue influence of the
Defendant over the Claimant, and that the Bank had actual notice of the undue influence.
 
(2)An order that the second Defendant do deliver up the Guarantee to be cancelled forthwith.
Footnotes
63
Attach to the Particulars of Claim here any other contractual documents relied on.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
