To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: making of the contract
Defences of borrower under s.61 of the CCA and the Regulations where the court can make an enforcement order
under s.65(1)
Version 2: to be used for agreements to which the Consumer Credit (Agreements) Regulations 2010 do apply
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
The Defendant denies that the document referred to in the Particulars of Claim constitutes a valid agreement enforceable
by the Claimant.
2.
The document purports to be an agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and thus governed
by the Consumer Credit (Agreements) Regulations 2010 (“the Regulations”).
3.
The document was not a properly executed regulated agreement under s.61 (1) of the CCA in that:
 
(a)Contrary to s.60(1)(b) the document did not embody all the terms of the agreement other than implied terms in that
it excluded a term orally agreed between the parties whereby the Claimant would effect insurance of the goods.
 
(b)Contrary to s.61(1)(c), when the document was presented to the Defendant for signature it was not in such a state
that all its terms were readily legible.
 
(c)Contrary to Reg 3(1) the document did not contain the information set out in Schedule 1 to the Regulations in the
following respects [set out failures relied on].
 
(d)Contrary to Reg 3(2) the information specified in Schedule 1 to the Regulations was not presented in a clear and
concise manner.
 
(e)Contrary to Reg 3(4) the document did not contain the statements of protection and remedies available to borrowers
set out in Schedule 2 to the Regulations in the following respects [set out failures relied on].
 
(f)Contrary to Reg 3(5) the document did not contain details of the security provided by the Defendant.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
4.
By reason of ss.61 and 65 of the CCA, therefore, the purported agreement is not enforceable by the Claimant against the
Defendant.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
