To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 21 - Commission Agents
Defences of the Principal
Defence to a claim for wrongful termination/indemnity and compensation and alleging limitation defence under the
1993 Regulations
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a separate document
1.
21-F16
It is admitted that the Defendant entered into the written agency agreement set out in paragraph 2 of the Particulars of
Claim and that the Claimant was a commercial agent within the meaning of the Commercial Agents (Council Directive)
Regulations 1993, (“the Regulations”). The relationship between the Claimant and the Defendant was governed by the
Regulations.
2.
The minimum period of notice for the termination of the agency agreement contained in regulation 15 was subject to the
overriding provisions of regulation 16.
3.
It was a term of the agency agreement that: [Set out the material terms.]
4.
Regulation 3 provided that, in performing his activities, the Claimant must look after the interests of the Defendant and
act dutifully and in good faith. In particular, the Claimant was required to make proper efforts to negotiate and where
appropriate conclude the transactions he was instructed to take care of; to communicate to his principal all the necessary
information available to him and to comply with the Defendant’s reasonable instructions to him.
5.
In breach of contract and/or the Regulations, the Claimant failed to perform his obligations.
Particulars
[Set out the breaches relied on.]
6.
By reason of the breaches, the Defendant was entitled to determine the agency agreement and did so with immediate effect
at a meeting held on [date] between the Claimant and the Defendant at the Defendant’s offices.

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9B or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
7.
Alternatively, the breaches set out in paragraph 5 amounted to a repudiation by the Claimant of the agency agreement and
the Defendant accepted that repudiation in the meeting referred to in paragraph 6.
8.
The Claimant is, therefore, disentitled to maintain his claim or rely on the terms of the agency agreement or the right to
notice contained in regulation 15.
9.
Further, by reason of the Claimant’s breaches and/or his repudiation, the Claimant’s right to an indemnity or compensation
are excluded by regulation 18.
10.
Further, the Claimant failed to notify the Defendant of his intention to pursue an entitlement to an indemnity and/or
compensation within 12 months from termination of the agency agreement. Pursuant to regulation 17(9), the Claimant has
thereby lost his entitlement to do so and the claim is now barred.
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9B]
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
