To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in Separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: making of the contract
Defence and Part 20 Counterclaim where the agreement has been cancelled under ss.67–73 of the CCA
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in Separate document
Defence
1.
20-F58
The Defendant admits he entered into the agreement referred to in the Particulars of Claim. The agreement was an
agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and was a cancellable agreement within the meaning
of s.67 of the CCA.
2.
Pursuant to the agreement and upon the execution thereof, the Defendant:
 
(a)paid to the Claimant the initial payment of £[..........]; and
 
(b)deposited with the Claimant the share certificate relating to 1,000 shares in XY Plc as security for the advance.
3.
By a notice of cancellation served on the Claimant on [date] pursuant to s.69 of the CCA, the Defendant duly cancelled
the agreement.
4.
By reason of such cancellation, the agreement ceased to be of any force or effect and the Claimant cannot now enforce
the agreement or any obligation thereunder.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
5.
In the premises the Claimant is not entitled to the relief claimed or to any relief.
Part 20 Counterclaim
6.
By way of counterclaim, the Defendant repeats his Defence herein.
7.
The agreement having been cancelled, by reason of s.70 of the CCA, the Claimant became liable to repay the said sum of
£[..........] to the Defendant and to return the said share certificate to the Defendant.
8.
Notwithstanding requests made by and on behalf of the Defendant, the Claimant has failed to repay the money or to return
the share certificate.
9.
By reason of the said failure of the Claimant to return the share certificate, the Defendant has suffered loss and damage.
Particulars
Had the Claimant returned the share certificates on [date] the Claimant would have sold the shares at £[..........] per share
whereas at the date of this defence and counterclaim, the market value of the shares is £[..........] per share, constituting
a total loss of £[..........].
The Defendant therefore counterclaims:
 
(1)£[..........].
 
(2)An order for the delivery up by the Claimant to the Defendant of the share certificate relating to the Defendant’s
shares in XY Plc.
 
(3)Damages.
 
(4)Interest pursuant to s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984.
[Statement of truth]
Note
See the notes to 20-F57.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
