Defence and counterclaim in a separate document served..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defence and counterclaim in a separate document served with
form N9
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Buyer’s Defences
Defence of set-off and Part 20 Counterclaim for damages for breach of warranties implied by the Sale of Goods Act
1979, s.12 or the Consumer Rights Act 2015 s.17
Defence and counterclaim in a separate document served with form N9
Defence and Part 20 Counterclaim
Defence
1.
25-F61
The Defendant admits that it entered into the oral agreement with the Claimant whereby the Claimant agreed to sell and
deliver to the Defendant the goods referred to in the Particulars of Claim.
2.
At the time of the agreement, the Claimant well knew that the Defendant, as a wholesaler in goods of that description, was
purchasing them for the purpose of resale in his said business.
3.
By reason of the [Sale of Goods Act 1979, s.12(2)] [the Consumer Rights Act 2015, s.17], there were terms of the agreement
that:
 
(a)the goods should be free from any undisclosed charge or encumbrance;
 
(b)the Defendant should enjoy quiet possession of the goods.
4.
In breach of the said terms, the goods were subject to a fixed and floating charge by way of debenture granted by the
Claimant to X Bank Plc (“the Bank”) on [date] (copy annexed to this Defence). This charge was not disclosed to the
Defendant before the agreement was made.

Defence and counterclaim in a separate document served..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
5.
On [date], acting pursuant to the charge, the Bank appointed PQ to be administrative receiver of the assets to which the
charge applied and on [date], PQ, as he was entitled to do, seized the goods from the Defendant and subsequently sold them.
6.
By reason of the Claimant’s breach of the said terms, the Defendant suffered loss and damage.
Particulars
(a)
Loss of the value of the goods
£[..........]
(b)
Loss of potential profit on resale
£[..........]
7.
Consequently, the Defendant denies that it is liable to the Claimant either as alleged in the Particulars of Claim or at all. If,
however, which is denied, the Defendant is liable to the Claimant, the Defendant will seek to set off against such liability
such sums as it may be awarded by way of counterclaim herein.
Part 20 Counterclaim
8.
By way of counterclaim, the Defendant repeats its defence herein.
The Defendant therefore counterclaims:
 
(1)Damages for breach of contract.
 
(2)Interest under [s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981] [s.69 of the County Courts Act 1984] at the rate of x% until
judgment.
[If the defence is contained in a separate document attached to the Form N9]
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
