To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part I. - Defences against Actions by the Lender or Owner
Regulated agreements: making of the contract
Defences of borrower under s.61 of the CCA and the Regulations where the court can make an enforcement order
under s.65(1)
Version 1: to be used for agreements made before 1 February 2011 and for agreements to which the Consumer Credit
(Agreements) Regulations 2010 do not apply
To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in a separate document
1.
20-F54
The Defendant denies that the document referred to in the Particulars of Claim constitutes a valid agreement enforceable
by the Claimant.
2.
The document purports to be an agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (“the CCA”) and thus governed
by the Consumer Credit (Agreements) Regulations 1983 (“the Regulations”).
3.
The document was not a properly executed regulated agreement under s.61(1) of the CCA in that:
 
(a)Contrary to s.60(1)(b) the document did not embody all the terms of the agreement other than implied terms in that
it excluded a term orally agreed between the parties whereby the Claimant would effect insurance of the goods.
 
(b)Contrary to s.61(1)(c), when the document was presented to the Defendant for signature it was not in such a state
that all its terms were readily legible.
 
(c)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 1 of the Regulations the document did not contain any heading
alternatively contained a heading in an incorrect form.
 
(d)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 2 of the Regulations, the document did not state the name or
any address of the lendor or the name or any address of the borrower.
 
(e)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 3 of the Regulations, the document did not contain any
alternatively any adequate description of the goods.
 
(f)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 4 of the Regulations, the document did not state a cash price
in respect of the goods.

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(g)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 5 of the Regulations, the document did not state the amount
of the advance payment to be made by the Defendant.
 
(h)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 9 of the Regulations, the document did not state the total
charge for credit.
 
(i)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 11 of the Regulations, the document did not show the total
amount payable.
 
(j)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 15 of the Regulations, the document failed to state the APR.
 
(k)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 18 of the Regulations, the document did not contain a statement
indicating that in calculating the APR no account had been taken of any variation which might occur under the
agreement of the rate or the amount of any item entering into that calculation.
 
(l)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 21 of the Regulations, the document contained no description
of the security provided by the Defendant.
 
(m)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 1, paragraph 22 of the Regulations, the document contained no indication
of any charges payable on default.
 
(n)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 2, paragraph 3 of the Regulations, the document did not contain a statement
in the prescribed form setting out the Defendant’s right to cancel the agreement.
 
(o)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 2, paragraph 5 of the Regulations, the document did not contain a paragraph
in the prescribed form setting out the Defendant’s rights of termination alternatively contained a paragraph purporting
to set out such right which was not in the form prescribed by the Regulations.
 
(p)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 2, paragraph 9 of the Regulations, the document did not contain a statement
in the prescribed form setting out the Defendant’s rights in relation to re-possession alternatively contained a statement
containing those rights which did not conform to the said paragraph.
 
(q)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 5, paragraph 1 of the Regulations, the document did not contain any form
of signature box alternatively contained a form of signature box which did not conform with the requirements of that
paragraph.
 
(r)Contrary to Regulation 2 and Schedule 5, paragraph 1 of the Regulations, the Defendant’s signature did not appear
in the form of signature box prescribed by that paragraph.
 
(s)Contrary to Regulation 2(4) of the Regulations the information, statements of the protections and remedies,
signature and other obligatory boxes did not appear in the order specified in that paragraph [give details]
 
(t)Contrary to Regulation 2(4) of the Regulations the information was not displayed under the headings “Key Financial
Information” and/or “Other Financial Information” and/or “Key Information”
 
(u)Contrary to Regulation 2(4) of the Regulations the information, statements of the protections and remedies,
signature and other obligatory boxes appeared in a form which was interspersed with other information [give details].
4.
By reason of ss.61 and 65 of the CCA, therefore, the purported agreement is not enforceable by the Claimant against the
Defendant.
[Statement of truth]

To be inserted in s.4 of Form 9B or 9D or contained in..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Note
Major changes were made to the 1983 Agreements Regulations by the Consumer Credit (Agreements) (Amendment)
Regulations 2004 (SI 2004/1482) which came into force on 31 May 2005 and apply to agreements made after that date.
Subparagraphs (s), (t) and (u) are examples of new rules introduced by the 2004 Regulations.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
