Claim for damages for negligence against a solicitor, UKBC-BULLENL 459373402 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Claim for damages for negligence against a solicitor
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 2
Part Y - Professional Negligence
Chapter 85 - Professional Negligence
Claim for damages for negligence against a solicitor
1.
85-Y8
The Defendants are and were at all material times a firm of solicitors practising from [address].
2.
On or about [date] the Claimant agreed “subject to contract” to purchase a property known as [name] and situated at
[address] (“the Property”). The Claimant retained the Defendants and the Defendants agreed to act for him in relation to
his purchase of the Property. The said retainer is evidenced by a letter dated [date] from the Defendants to the Claimant.
3.
There were implied terms of the aforesaid retainer that the Defendants would exercise the care and skill to be expected
of reasonably competent conveyancing solicitors in performing their duties pursuant to the said retainer. Further or
alternatively, the Defendants owed the Claimant a duty of care in tort to that effect.
4.
The Property comprised a two-storey house, a garden and an outbuilding which was located to the West side of the Property.
The position of the outbuilding relative to the Property, the neighbouring building and the public highway is shown on
the attached plan.
5.
At the meeting at the Defendants’ offices on [date] in the course of which the Claimant first retained the Defendants, the
Claimant commented to B, the partner who was handling the conveyance on his behalf, that he had for some time been
looking for a house with a garage in the area in question, because he owned a classic car which he wished to store off the
road, and that it was his intention to convert the outbuilding into a garage.
6.
The Claimant’s purchase of the Property was completed on [date], the Defendants having purportedly investigated title
and completed all necessary searches.
7.
The boundary between the Property and the plot belonging to the owners of the neighbouring building is shown in red
on the attached plan. The outbuilding is located on the border of the Property and the land between the outbuilding and
the public highway in fact belonged to the owners of the neighbouring property. The vendors of the Property did not have
any right of vehicular access across that land. The Claimant was unaware of this at the time of completion of the purchase
of the Property.

Claim for damages for negligence against a solicitor, UKBC-BULLENL 459373402 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
8.
In breach of contract and/or negligently the Defendants failed to exercise the care and skill to be expected of reasonably
competent conveyancing solicitors in performing their duties pursuant to the said retainer.
Particulars of Negligence
 
(a)failing to discover that the land between the outbuilding and the public highway did not form part of the Property;
 
(b)failing to make any or any adequate inquiry as to whether any vehicular right of access existed over that land;
 
(c)failing to advise the Claimant that the said land did not form part of the Property and/or that there were no such
rights of access and/or that the outbuilding was in effect landlocked and therefore not suitable for the proposed use
as a garage.
9.
By reason of the matters aforesaid, the Claimant has suffered loss and damage.
Particulars of Loss and Damage
 
(a)the difference between the contract price of £[..........], which the Claimant had offered to and did pay in the belief
that the outbuilding could be converted to a garage, and the market value of the Property without vehicular access
to the outbuilding; and
 
(b)the Claimant’s costs of obtaining legal advice from another firm of solicitors as to ownership of the land in question,
in the sum of £[..........].
10.
Further, the Claimant is entitled to and claims interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 on any sum which
may be awarded herein for such period and at such rate as the Court shall think fit.
AND the Claimant claims:
 
(1)Damages.
 
(2)Interest pursuant to s.35A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 as aforesaid.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
