Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1 or served
subsequently
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 20 - Credit, Finance and Leasing
Part A. - Claims by the Creditor or Owner against the Debtor or Hirer
Credit tokens (regulated agreements)
Claim by lender for the return of the credit token and an injunction
Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1 or served subsequently
1.
20-F17
By an agreement in writing dated [date], the Claimant agreed to issue to the Defendant a credit token, namely an Xcard,
for the purpose of acquiring goods and services on credit. A copy of the agreement is annexed to this Claim Form.
2.
The agreement was regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 and this is a Consumer Credit Act claim.
3.
The following were provisions of the agreement:
 
(a)The Defendant should be granted credit up to such limit as the Claimant might from time to time determine and
notify to the Defendant.
 
(b)The Defendant should not without the consent of the Claimant exceed his current credit limit.
 
(c)Should the Defendant by any transaction exceed the current credit limit, the Claimant should be entitled to serve a
notice of default and termination, requiring him to remedy his breach of contract by paying the excess over the credit
limit within 14 days and giving notice that, if the breach were not remedied, upon the expiry of the said period, the
agreement should determine, together with the Defendant’s right to use the Xcard.
 
(d)Upon termination of the agreement the Defendant should:
 
(i)return the Xcard to the Claimant;
 
(ii)cease to make any further use of the Xcard;
 
(iii)pay all sums then owing together with interest at the Claimant’s current interest rate.
4.
Prior to [date] the Defendant made use of the Xcard for the purpose of acquiring goods and services on credit.

Particulars of claim to be attached to a Claim Form N1..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
5.
By transactions in [date] the Defendant exceeded the credit limit (then £[..........]) and by [date] the sum of £[..........] was
due to the Claimant. By a notice of default and termination dated [date] (copy annexed to these Particulars of Claim) the
Claimant required the Defendant to remedy his breach of the said agreement by paying the sum of £[..........] (being the
excess over the credit limit) within 14 days and gave notice that, if the said sum was not paid within the said period, upon
the expiry thereof, the said agreement should determine and the Defendant should no longer be entitled to make use of
the Xcard.
6.
The Defendant failed to pay the said sum of £[..........] to the Claimant within the said period of 14 days and on [date] the
said agreement therefore determined.
7.
Notwithstanding such determination, wrongfully and in breach of the said agreement:
 
(a)the Defendant failed to deliver up the Xcard to the Claimant; and
 
(b)the Defendant continued to make use of the Xcard for the purpose of acquiring goods and services.
8.
At the date of this claim the following sums are due and owing to the Claimant:
 
(a)£[..........] in respect of transactions using the Xcard;
 
(b)£[..........] interest at the Claimant’s interest rate of x%.
9.
The Claimant believes that, unless ordered otherwise by the Court, the Defendant will continue to make use of the Xcard
for the purpose of acquiring goods and services.
The Claimant therefore claims:
 
(1)An order for the delivery up to the Claimant of the Xcard issued to the Defendant.
 
(2)An order restraining the Defendant from making any use whatsoever of the Xcard.
 
(3)£[..........] due in respect of transactions using the Xcard.
 
(4)£[..........] contractual interest accrued from [date when each sum became due] to the date of the issue of the claim
and continuing at the daily rate of £[..........] until judgment.
 
(5)Payment of any further sums due in respect of transactions using the Xcard with interest at the Claimant’s current
interest rate to judgment.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
