Defences of the buyer, UKBC-BULLENL 459372179 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defences of the buyer
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Defences
Defences of the buyer
25-55
Where there has been an outright sale, the seller’s action will generally be for all or part of the purchase price or for damages
for non-acceptance. In the case of a conditional sale or credit sale agreement, the action is usually based on non-payment of the
instalments due under the contract (which may be a ground for termination of the agreement) but, as virtually all conditional
sale agreements contain clauses forbidding alienation of the goods before property has passed to the buyer and clauses obliging
the buyer to keep the goods in good condition or to keep them insured, the action may be based on a breach of one of these
obligations.
The buyer’s defence may be based on a denial of the basic facts alleged by the seller (e.g. the existence of a sale, the tender of
delivery or the happening of the date or event which makes the price payable). If the buyer is to allege that the contract of sale
is unenforceable owing to fraud or illegality this must be specifically pleaded.
In a high proportion of cases, however, the buyer will want to set up as a defence the breach of some obligation of the seller,
particularly the obligations created by SGA ss.12 to 15 or CRA Part 1. In these circumstances, the buyer must decide whether:
 
(a)he is alleging a breach of condition (with or without a pre-contract misrepresentation) which entitles him either to rescind
the contract or to treat it as having been repudiated by the seller;
 
(b)whether he is alleging a breach of warranty which entitles him to damages alone; or
 
(c)in consumer cases, he is seeking to assert one of the remedies afforded by SGA Pt 5A or CRA Pt 1.
In (a), in addition to any damages which may be payable, the buyer is normally entitled to repayment of any part of the purchase
price which has already been paid. In that what the buyer is alleging would be a complete defence to the seller’s claim, any
claim for damages or the repayment of money must be included in a counterclaim.
In (b), any damages for breach of warranty can be set off “in diminution or extinction of the price” (SGA s.53(1)) and the
measure of damages is the “estimated loss directly and naturally resulting, in the ordinary course of events, from the breach of
warranty” (SGA s.53(2)). In the case of the breach of obligations under SGA ss.13 to 15, the measure of damages is “prima
facie the difference between the value of the goods at the time of delivery to the buyer and the value they would have had if
they had fulfilled the warranty” (SGA s.53(3)). This prima facie presumption can be displaced (e.g. if the goods are sold to a
buyer known to the seller to be intending to use them in manufacturing other goods which would be sold on 30 ).
25-56
If, therefore, the damages for breach of warranty are unlikely to exceed the balance of the price due, the alleging of breach of
warranty can, technically, be relied on as a defence alone, without the need for a counterclaim. It is usually wiser, however, in
cases of breach of warranty to include a counterclaim for the damages alleged.
In (c), the choice or choices of remedy must be set out (in the order preferred) and it is always wise to include a claim for damages
as in a non-consumer case. Note that some of the remedies may require a prayer seeking a mandatory order in the counterclaim.
In cases governed by the CRA, the remedies and the right to damages will be largely governed by the choices open to the
consumer under CRA s.19 and the pleading of a consumer’s case will follow from that.

Defences of the buyer, UKBC-BULLENL 459372179 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Where the seller’s claim arises out of a conditional sale or credit-sale agreement, in addition to the ordinary buyer’s defences,
the buyer may be able to raise one of the many defences afforded by the Consumer Credit Act 1974—see Section 20: Credit
Finance and Leasing.
In non-consumer cases a buyer who wishes to rely on a breach of SGA ss.12 to 15 may be aware that the seller will seek to
counter this in his reply by reliance on an exemption clause in the contract of sale and may wish himself to rely on UCTA to
defeat that exemption clause. This can create pleading difficulties. It is rare that a seller suing for the price will make reference
to his exemption clauses in his statement of claim: they will not be necessary to his cause of action. The buyer raises breaches
of condition or warranty in his defence and the seller then raises an exemption clause in the reply. Although it is for the party
relying on an exemption clause to establish both that the clause is capable of applying because the other party did not deal as a
“consumer” and that the clause should apply in the present case as being reasonable, it is normally sensible for the party relying
on UCTA to indicate the fact (even if only to put the court on notice). If UCTA has not been mentioned in the defence, then it
may be necessary to amend that defence at a later stage or even, as a last resort to serve (with permission) a further pleading.
Many pleaders who anticipate an attempt by the seller to rely on an exemption clause tend to grasp the nettle and to plead in
the defence first that the buyer was a “consumer” (if appropriate) and secondly that the buyer will rely on the UCTA.
Note the rules relating to “distance selling” and “doorstep selling” will afford an additional line of defence in relevant cases
—see paras.25-14 and 25-15.
Footnotes
30
Bence Graphics International Ltd v Fasson UK Ltd [1998] Q.B. 87; see also Total Liban SA v Vitol Energy SA [2001]
Q.B. 643.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
