To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate
document
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 27 - Surety
Surety’s Defences
Defence based on negligent realisation of security
To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a separate document
Defence
1.
27-F11
The Defendant admits that he entered into the contract of guarantee set out in the Particulars of Claim (“the guarantee”),
whereby he guaranteed the liabilities of XY Limited to the Claimant.
2.
It was an express condition of the guarantee that the Claimant should procure the execution by XY Limited of a charge
over its freehold property at [address] to secure all sums due to the Claimant.
3.
In pursuance of the guarantee, the Claimant procured the execution by XY Limited of a first legal charge over the said
freehold property dated [date].
4.
On [date] in pursuance of its rights under the said charge, the Claimant took possession of the property and thereafter
attempted to market it.
5.
On [date] the Claimant entered into a contract with PQ Limited whereby the Claimant agreed to sell the property to PQ
Limited for the sum of £250,000.

To be entered as s.3 of Form N9 or attached as a..., UKBC-BULLENL...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
6.
The Claimant conducted the marketing and sale of the property negligently in that:
 
(a)it took no professional advice as to the value of the property;
 
(b)it failed to take into account particulars of similar properties in the vicinity which were being offered for sale at
prices well in excess of £250,000;
 
(c)it failed to take into account advertisements in local newspapers showing similar properties in the vicinity which
were being offered for sale at prices well in excess of £250,000.
7.
The Claimant will say that the true market value of the property at the relevant time was £450,000 and that, but for the
Claimant’s negligence, that sum would have been realised on sale.
8.
At the date of the said sale, the sum due from XY Limited to the Claimant and subject to the Defendant’s guarantee was
£390,000.
9.
The Defendant admits that the Claimant served the demand set out in the Particulars of Claim seeking to recover £140,000
from him under the guarantee.
10.
In the circumstances, however, the Claimant is entitled to have the sum which would have been raised from a sale of the
property at full market value set off against the indebtedness of XY Limited at that date. As that sum would have fully
discharged the indebtedness, leaving nothing recoverable under the guarantee, the Defendant is not liable to the Claimant
under the guarantee in the sum claimed or any sum.
[Statement of truth]
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
