Inclusions and omissions, UKBC-BULLENL 459371224 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Inclusions and omissions
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 19 - Introduction
Inclusions and omissions
19-02
For obvious reasons, auctioneers, commission agents and factoring have been included within the section.
Surety
19-03
Personal surety presents some overlap between business law and other sections of the work, notably banking, and although
duplication of forms has been avoided as much as possible, some duplication will be inevitable. Surety in the context of the
business law section is treated as a general topic but there are technicalities of banking law which may well justify specialised
forms for personal surety actions in that section.
As surety is being treated as a general topic, the decision has been taken to subsume all personal surety under one head. Earlier
editions of the work had separate sections on “Guarantee” and “Indemnity”.
The approach of having two different sections tended to emphasise the differences between the two concepts: the present
approach is designed to stress the similarities between them. The change is made for two reasons, one editorial and the other
arising from the procedural reforms of the Civil Procedure Rules (CPR).
First, although, as a matter of legal principle, there are significant differences between the concepts of guarantee and indemnity,
it is often difficult in practice to place a surety agreement in its correct category, particularly as the law of surety has always been
keen to have regard to the substance of the transaction and not simply to the wording of the relevant document. Accordingly,
the editors felt that having the law and the precedents for guarantees and indemnities in the same section would help readers
by giving an overview. That said, the conceptual requirements of pleading are in both cases so similar as to require joint
consideration.
Secondly, under the CPR, there are now classes of personal surety actions (principally those arising out of agreements regulated
by the Consumer Credit Act 1974) where there are strict procedural rules equally applicable to all kinds of personal surety. It
would clearly be otiose to have to repeat those rules under two separate headings.
Torts against goods
19-04
At first sight the presence in this section of torts against goods may seem anomalous, all the other subjects being firmly
contractual. The reason for their inclusion is that this field of litigation is principally concerned with title to goods (or the right
to possession of goods) and, in practice, most actions are set in a business context (even when one of the parties may be a
private individual). Usually, goods have been sold or hired out in the course of a business by someone who does not have or

Inclusions and omissions, UKBC-BULLENL 459371224 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
may not have the necessary right to do so. Questions arise as to whether the buyer or hirer is affected by this want of title or
can assert a title valid against the original owner.
Omissions
19-05
Some areas of obvious concern to business people have been omitted from this section because they fit more neatly into other
sections. Cheques and bills of exchange, for example, are more appropriately dealt with in the context of banking and will be
found in Part C. Financial services will also be found there. Credit cards, on the other hand, are, in the case of individuals,
regulated under consumer credit legislation and are dealt with in Chapter 20: Credit, Finance and Leasing.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
