Witness Statement in Support of Arbitration Claim Form, UKBC-BULLENL 459370722...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Witness Statement in Support of Arbitration Claim Form
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part A - Arbitration
Chapter 3 - Appeals on Points of Law (Section 69)
Witness Statement in Support of Arbitration Claim Form
3-A3
Claimants
[Name, e.g. K.S. Malone]
1st
Exhibits [---]
[date]
Claim No. [–]
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
BUSINESS AND PROPERTY COURTS OF ENGLAND AND WALES
COMMERCIAL COURT (QBD)
In an arbitration claim between
[COMPANY A]
Claimant
-and-
[COMPANY B]
Defendant
First Witness Statement of [Kevin S Malone]
I, KEVIN S MALONE of [residence or workplace], WILL SAY:
1.
I am a state role and employer, the Claimant in this arbitration claim. I am authorized by the Claimant to make this witness
statement in support of its applications for permission to appeal and for an extension of time.
2.
These applications relate to a Sales and Purchase Agreement dated 15 January 2015 for 100,000MT of coal on FOB
Balikpapan, Indonesia terms entered into between the Claimant as seller and the Defendant as buyer (the “Contract”). The
dispute arising thereunder was referred to arbitration with the arbitration award (the “Award”) of the arbitral tribunal (the
“Tribunal”) published on 20 April 2015.

Witness Statement in Support of Arbitration Claim Form, UKBC-BULLENL 459370722...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
3.
The facts and matters set out below are within my knowledge and are true or, where indicated, have been supplied to me
from the source identified and are true to the best of my knowledge, information and belief. I refer to the bundle of true
copy documents marked “KM1”.
Claimant’s application for permission to appeal under s.69 of the Act
4. The question is one which the Tribunal was asked to determine (s.69(3)(b))
The question which forms the subject of this appeal was one which the Tribunal was asked to determine. It involves the
construction of clause 32.1 of the Contract and is therefore a question of law. This is the case even though the clause
concerned was bespoke in nature rather than a standard-form clause.
5. The decision of the Tribunal on the question is obviously wrong (s.69(3)(c)(i))
This is, strictly speaking, a matter for submission but, for the reasons set out in the skeleton argument served by the
Claimant, I would respectfully invite the Court to find that the decision of the Tribunal on the construction of clause 32.1
of the Contract is obviously wrong. The clause is meant to be read disjunctively so as to only exclude recovery of such
loss of profit which is to be regarded as indirect loss or consequential damage. It does not exclude recovery of such loss
of profit which is to be regarded as direct loss.
6. Determination of the question will substantially affect the rights of the parties (s.69(3)(a))
Determination of the question concerning the construction of clause 32.1 of the Contract will substantially affects the rights
of the parties. This is because if the appeal for which permission is being sought is not allowed, the Claimant will be unable
to recover the loss of profit it has suffered in the sum of £1 million.
7. It is just and proper in all the circumstances for the Court to determine the question (s.69(3)(d))
It is just and proper in all the circumstances for the Court to determine the question which forms the subject of this appeal.
The question for which permission is sought relates to a point of interpretation which can be resolved by reference to the
Contract itself. No evidence of factual matrix had been adduced in the underlying arbitration and the Court is therefore as
well-placed to determine the question on appeal as the Tribunal was in the arbitration.
Claimant’s application for an extension of time
8.
I was first notified by an e-mail sent by the Defendant’s solicitors on 20 May 2015 in relation to the issue of costs
in the arbitration of the fact that the Award had been published on 20 April 2015. Following the exchange of further
correspondence between both sets of solicitors, it transpired that the Award had been sent to the wrong e-mail and postal
addresses for the Claimant and, as such, we were unaware of the Award until a copy was forwarded to us by the Defendant’s
solicitors on 20 May 2015.
9.
Had it not been for the fact that we were not in receipt of a copy of the Award until 20 May 2015 (for which the Claimant
is not at fault) and the fact that the Award had been sent by e-mail by the Tribunal to the wrong addresses (a matter in
relation to which I was not aware until 20 May 2015 and for which the Claimant is, again, not at fault), the Claimant would

Witness Statement in Support of Arbitration Claim Form, UKBC-BULLENL 459370722...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
have received the Award many weeks earlier and the arbitration claim form would definitely have been issued within the
statutory time limit. The fact that the arbitration claim form was not issued within the 28-day period prescribed by the
Act is inadvertent and not intentional.
10.
Notwithstanding this, as soon as we realised what the position was, steps were taken for the arbitration claim form and
supporting materials to be prepared and the arbitration claim was issued by 22 May 2015, within 48 hours of receipt of
the Award from the Defendant’s solicitors.
11.
Given that the delay in receiving the Award was not the fault of the Claimant and the fact that the arbitration claim form
was issued within 48 hours as described above, I would respectfully ask that the Court grant an extension of time for the
Claimant to appeal the Award.
Statement of truth
I believe that the facts stated in this witness statement are true.
Signed:...............
Name:...............
Dated:...............
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
