Conditions and warranties, UKBC-BULLENL 459372228 (2022)
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Conditions and warranties
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part F - Business Law
Chapter 25 - Supply of Goods and Digital Content
Action for breach of condition or warranty
Conditions and warranties
25-22
In general whether an express or implied term of a sale contract is a condition or a warranty is, as with all contracts, a matter
of construction of the contract (SGA s.11(3)) and where the SGA implied terms into a sale contract, it was careful to specify
which are conditions and which warranties. Where there is a breach of condition, the buyer may treat the contract as repudiated
or he may elect to treat the breach of condition as a breach of warranty and sue for damages (SGA s.11(2)) These rules remain
unaltered by the CRA. In a non-severable contract where the buyer is not a consumer, once the buyer accepts all or part of
the goods (in the absence of an express or implied term in the contract to the contrary), the buyer can no longer reject the
goods but must treat the breach of condition as a breach of warranty (s.11(4)). This is, however, subject to the rule concerning
partial rejection in s.35A, and to the right of the buyer to proper information before deciding whether to accept or reject—
see para.25-12.
In consumer sales, however, the range of new remedies available to the buyer has somewhat overtaken the often-mechanistic
application of the rules relating to conditions and warranties. The law in this area remains the same for both categories of sale
but the practical effect for consumers is greatly diminished. The CRA rejects the distinction between condition and warranty
completely and simply uses the word “term”. It is important to note that, in addition to its other provisions about unfair contract
terms, each of the chapters on goods, digital content and services contains a section setting out a list of the terms inserted into
contracts by other sections of the chapter which cannot in any circumstances be excluded. In those circumstances, it has ceased
to regard these terms as being ‘implied’ into a contract of supply: the reality is that they are imposed by law and the range of
remedies under the CRA makes no distinction between conditions and warranties.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
