Defence by mortgagor alleging undue influence defence, UKBC-BULLENL 459371137...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defence by mortgagor alleging undue influence defence
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 15 - Mortgages and Charges
Defence by mortgagor alleging undue influence defence
Defence
1.
15-E3
The second Defendant is the wife of the first Defendant, Mr A, the sole director of and shareholder in a company, B Limited
(“the Company”). The first Defendant was a customer of the [..........] branch of C Bank Plc, as was the Company. 29
2.
It is admitted that on or about [date], the second Defendant signed a document purporting to be an all monies legal charge,
whereby the second Defendant and the first Defendant jointly charged the matrimonial home to the Claimant, C Bank
(“the Mortgage”).
Undue Influence exerted over second Defendant
3.
The purported execution of the Mortgage was procured by the undue influence of the first Defendant over the second
Defendant.
Particulars of Undue Influence
 
(i)On or about [date], the first Defendant returned to the matrimonial home bearing the unexecuted Mortgage.
 
(ii)The first Defendant told the second Defendant that if she did not sign the Mortgage, the Claimant, the Company’s
largest creditor, would call in its debt.
 
(iii)The first Defendant also told the second Defendant that he had personally guaranteed the debts of the Company
and would be rendered bankrupt if that guarantee were called upon, and that the likely consequence would be that
the matrimonial home would be repossessed.

Defence by mortgagor alleging undue influence defence, UKBC-BULLENL 459371137...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
 
(iv)The first Defendant said that if any of those things occurred, he would leave the second Defendant and return to
his native Peru taking with him their three young children.
 
(v)As a result, the second Defendant signed the Mortgage (her signature, and that of the first Defendant, being
witnessed by a friend of the first Defendant, a Mr Z). At no time was she given the opportunity to take independent
legal advice nor was the nature or effect of the transaction explained to her.
Claimant’s constructive notice
4.
The Claimant had constructive notice of the undue influence exercised by the first Defendant over the second Defendant.
5.
The relationship between the second Defendant and the first Defendant and/or between the second Defendant and the
Company was not commercial in nature. Further, the second Defendant was the wife of the sole director and shareholder
of company for the benefit of which the Mortgage was granted.
6.
The Claimant failed to take any, or any adequate, steps to bring home to the second Defendant the risk she was running
by mortgaging her share of the matrimonial home to secure the debts of the company, B Limited and/or the nature and
effect of the transaction.
7.
In particular, but without prejudice to the generality of the above, the Claimant failed to satisfy itself that the second
Defendant had received independent legal advice before executing the Mortgage.
8.
As a consequence of the facts and matters set out above, the Claimant had constructive notice of the exercise of undue
influence by the first Defendant over the second Defendant.
9.
By a letter dated [date], the second Defendant rescinded the Mortgage; alternatively does so by service of this Defence.

Defence by mortgagor alleging undue influence defence, UKBC-BULLENL 459371137...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
3
Counterclaim
10.
The second Defendant repeats paragraphs 1–8 above by way of counterclaim.
AND the second Defendant counterclaims:
 
(1)A declaration that the Mortgage has been rescinded/set aside as having been procured by the undue influence of
the first Defendant, and that the Claimant had constructive notice of the undue influence.
 
(2)An order that the Claimant do deliver up the Mortgage to be cancelled forthwith.
Footnotes
29
The term wife is used here but the term husband, wife or civil partner may be equally appropriate.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
