Defence claiming relief under Administration of Justice Acts, UKBC-BULLENL 459371132...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
1
Defence claiming relief under Administration of Justice Acts
Bullen & Leake & Jacob's Precedents of Pleadings 19th Ed.
Original Mainwork
Volume 1
Part E - Banking and Financial Services
Chapter 15 - Mortgages and Charges
Defence claiming relief under Administration of Justice Acts
1.
15-E5
The Defendant admits that he executed the Mortgage appended to the Particulars of Claim as “A”. The Defendant admits
the amount claimed by the Bank under the Mortgage. 30
2.
The Defendant is in the process of marketing the mortgaged property and copies of the estate agent’s marketing material
are appended at “D” and “E” to this Defence. The asking price for the property is £[..........] and the estimated time to
completion of a sale, according to the estate agents’ reports is 6 weeks.
3.
Further, it is in the interests of both the Defendant and the Bank for the sale of the property to be at the highest possible
price. The sale price is likely to be higher if the property is sold by the Defendant than if the property were to be repossessed
by the Bank and sold as a forced sale.
4.
In the time until the date of completion of any sale of the property, the Defendant is willing and able to pay monthly
instalments of £[..........] to cover the interest repayments on the outstanding loan amount.
5.
In these circumstances the Defendant would ask that the Court accept that the Defendant will be in a position to repay its
debts to the Claimant within a reasonable time from the sale proceeds of the property.
6.
In the interim, the Bank suffers no prejudice from the delay in obtaining a possession order, since the Defendant will pay
monthly instalments of interest as set out above.
7.
The Defendant requests that the Court exercise discretion under [insert here the relevant provisions of the Administration
of Justice Acts 1970 and 1973].

Defence claiming relief under Administration of Justice Acts, UKBC-BULLENL 459371132...
© 2025 Thomson Reuters.
2
Footnotes
30
Note that the court will generally consider the discretion under the AJAs even if there is no pleading by the mortgagor
specifically raising this.
End of Document
© 2025 SWEET & MAXWELL
